2022 IEEE 15th Pacific Visualization Symposium (PacificVis)

Evaluating the Effect of Enhanced Text-Visualization Integration on
Combating Misinformation in Data Story
Xiaojuan Ma†

Chengbo Zheng*

Hong Kong University of Science and Technology

A BSTRACT
Misinformation has disruptive effects on our lives. Many researchers
have looked into means to identify and combat misinformation in
text or data visualization. However, there is still a lack of understanding of how misinformation can be introduced when text and
visualization are combined to tell data stories, not to mention how
to improve the lay public’s awareness of possible misperceptions
about facts in narrative visualization. In this paper, we first analyze
where misinformation could possibly be injected into the productionconsumption process of data stories through a literature survey. Then,
as a first step towards combating misinformation in data stories, we
explore possible defensive design methods to enhance the reader’s
awareness of information misalignment when data facts are scripted
and visualized. More specifically, we conduct a between-subjects
crowdsourcing study to investigate the impact of two design methods
enhancing text-visualization integration, i.e., explanatory annotation
and interactive linking, on users’ awareness of misinformation in
data stories. The study results show that although most participants
still can not find misinformation, the two design methods can significantly lower the perceived credibility of the text or visualizations.
Our work informs the possibility of fighting an infodemic through
defensive design methods.

Figure 1: (A) [40]: Narrative visualizations combining rich text
and visualizations in online mass media. (B) [1]: Combine text and
visualization to tell stories on social media

there is a pressing demand for in-depth understanding of how problematic design can mislead readers and bring misinformation.
Moreover, there lacks effective methods that can help lay public
stay aware of misinformation in narrative visualizations. Previous
works have explored how to uncover visualization mirage in visual
analytics process [37] and how to reveal and repair chart errors [7].
Nevertheless, the interplay between text and visualization in narrative visualizations is rarely considered. A common approach to
combat misinformation is performing automatic or manual factchecking [56]. While the number of fact-checking services and
algorithms for textual information is growing rapidly [56], not many
of them could efficiently and cost-effectively detect misinformation
in narrative visualizations.
Facing the aforementioned challenges, in this paper, we begin by asking, “How might misinformation be introduced into
narrative visualization?”. To this end, we first conducted a literature survey and derived a pipeline that describes the data storytelling production-consumption process. Then, we analyzed
every stage of this data storytelling pipeline to identify possible causes of misinformation and then grouped these causes into
three categories: author-induced reader-undetectable misinformation (AIRUM), author-induced reader-detectable misinformation
(AIRDM) and reader-induced misinformation (RIM).
Next, we proceed to explore possible methods to combat misinformation. Countering AIRUM and RIM might involve moderating
the behavior of authors and readers of data stories [15, 37], whereas
mitigating AIRDM could be achieved by better scrutinizing the presented data stories. We thus focus on AIRDM in this paper. Besides,
as the first step towards combating misinformation in data stories,
we focus on the magazine-style of narrative visualization, which
is popular in journalism [57]. We target two typical issues for the
magazine style under AIRDM : (1) deceptive visualization [45], and
(2) text-visualization misalignment [27].
As discussed above, there are still technical barriers to detecting
misinformation in data stories. As an alternative, we are interested
in exploring whether there exist some defensive design methods to
enhance people’s awareness of misinformation, which can prevent
readers from falling for problematic data stories in the first place.

Index Terms:
Human-centered computing—Visualization—
Visualization design and evaluation methods
1

I NTRODUCTION

In recent years, the proliferation of misinformation on online media
has become a paramount public concern. During the COVID-19
pandemic, misinformation, such as ingesting bleach as a coronavirus
treatment, is a serious threat to public health [49]. While it is widely
known that false or inaccurate information can be disseminated
through text and/or images, visualizations appear to be another
increasingly popular vehicle for misinformation [13, 34, 45]. Due
to its persuasive power [44], visualization may be an even more
dangerous yet harder to detect tool to manipulate people’s opinion.
A typical example of misinformation in visualizations is the inverted
axis, which breaks the conventional direction of the axis and makes
readers receive a reversal message to the facts [45].
Prior research has investigated misinformation existed in standalone visualization, e.g., bar chart [31, 45], thematic maps [12], etc.
However, few studies are concerned with how misinformation can be
introduced in narrative visualization. One popular form of narrative
visualization as presented in Fig. 1 consists of rich text providing
contextual information and some key piece(s) of fact expressed by
data visualization [33]. It is commonly known as illustrated text [55]
(also magazine style [51]). While existing research efforts on narrative visualizations mainly concern facilitation of its creation [52],
* e-mail: cb.zheng@connect.ust.hk
† e-mail: mxj@cse.ust.hk

2165-8773/22/$31.00 ©2022 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/PacificVis53943.2022.00023

141

