3.2

that dynamically links text with relevant visualizations. Such a technique can effectively guide readers through the author’s intended
narratives. Zhi et al. [57] investigate two forms of text-visualizationintegration methods – layout and linking. They found slideshow
layout with linking can improve readers’ recall of and engagement
with a narrative visualization. Wang et al. [55] compared different
narrative visualization types and found increasing text-visualization
integration can promote reader’s understanding. Our study focuses
on two design methods to connect textual and visualization components in data stories, i.e., Annotation and Linking. Both of them are
commonly used in designing magazine-style narrative visualization.
Moreover, there exist fast algorithms [28, 30] to implement these
two design methods, which make them easy to promote.
3

By searching for related publications in TVCG, CHI, and other relevant venues, we synthesize in detail 17 number of the most relevant
literature. We identify possible misinformation causes in every step
of the pipeline proposed above from the literature. We present these
causes and corresponding literature in Table. 1. Besides, we also
consult works from journalism and psychology to survey more possibilities of causes of misinformation. Next, we put the resulting
list of possible causes of misinformation in the context of narrative visualization production and consumption and divide them into
three categories: author-induced reader-undetectable misinformation (AIRUM), author-induced reader-detectable misinformation
(AIRDM) and reader-induced misinformation (RIM).
Author-Induced Reader-Undetectable Misinformation By
AIRUM, we mean false or inaccurate information injected into
the production process through manipulations invisible to readers. AIRUM mainly occurs in the Analyzing step. For instance,
authors might only pick those data that support their intention or
even falsify data to meet their claims [10]. Readers with external
knowledge about the data story and its context might be able to find
such AIRUM; however, it cannot be corrected based only on the
information provided by the authors.
Author-Induced Reader-Detectable Misinformation We define AIRDM as miscommunication rooted in the production process
but can be detected by careful readers. Such misinformation might
concern Visualizing, Scripting, and Arranging steps as the intersection of the production and consumption processes illustrated in Fig. 3.
Authors’ decisions in these steps are directly reflected in the output,
and skeptical readers can spot the misleading elements. Deceptive
visualization is a well-known cause of AIRDM in the Visualizing
step. The author may truncate the axis or take area as the quantity
that misleads readers intentionally or unintentionally [45]. Readers
can capture the existence of such misinformation by comparing the
difference(s) between the deceptive chart and the conventional ones.
Text-visualization misalignment is a typical example of AIRDM that
occurs in the Scripting step [27]. The author may manipulate the
text-chart correspondence to (mis)guide the reader’s attention, but a
vigilant reader can find misalignment through close inspection.
Reader-Induced Misinformation RIM refers to the misperception that happens during the consumption process and depends on
how the visual argument(s) are read in real-world situations. This
kind of misinformation relates primarily to the Reading step. The
value, belief, and the information exposure environment of an individual could all cause misreadings [19, 38]. RIM impact readers
differently. Authors’ decisions in the production process can change
the tendency of a message being more deceptive or not, but cannot
fully determine whether the story will mislead readers [49].
Combating AIRUM requires a more rigorous authoring method
(e.g., metamorphic testing [37]). To fight RIM, promoting education
on data and visualization is one of the directions currently under
consideration by academics [15]. As for mitigating AIRDM, a
plausible approach is presenting the data story in a way that allows
readers to scrutinize it easier [49]. Therefore, in the scope of this
paper, we focus on AIRDM and conduct a crowdsourcing study to
explore whether different narrative visualization designs may affect
readers’ awareness of such misinformation.

M ISINFORMATION IN N ARRATIVE V ISUALIZATION

McNutt et al. propose a pipeline of visual analytics to investigate
how errors generated in each phase may undermine messages conveyed in the final visualization [37]. We are inspired to adopt a
similar approach to obtaining a comprehensive view of the relationships between critical narrative visualization creation steps and the
types of misinformation that can be introduced to mislead readers.
To this end, we first construct a pipeline that dissects the productionconsumption process of data storytelling (covered in subsection 3.1)
and then conduct a literature survey to identify possible sources of
misinformation (following the definition in subsection 2.1) at each
stage of the pipeline (detailed in subsection 3.2).
3.1

Where does Misinformation Come from?

Data Storytelling Process

Our pipeline is mainly adapted from Lee et al.’s visual storytelling
process [33] while also motivated by previous works about visual
analytics [8, 37]. As we are more concerned with how possible
falsified information injected in the production-consumption process
and lead to readers’ misperceptions of facts, we follow McNutt et
al.’s [37] practice and omit complex cycles and nested sub-process [8,
33] to enable easy tracing of the origin of misinformation.
Our pipeline describes the path from raw data to the perceived
message by five main steps, namely, Analyzing, Visualizing, Scripting, Arranging, and Reading (see Fig. 3). We further conceptualize
the production process as steps involving authoring actions and the
consumption process as steps of which the output will be directly
perceived by readers. According to this, Analyzing is only related
to the production process and Reading is only associated with the
consumption process. Visualizing, Scripting, and Arranging are
involved in both the production and the consumption processes. The
detailed definitions of these steps are as follows:
Analyzing denotes the process that authors analyze the raw data
to extract data facts that they intend to convey [8, 33]. In this step
authors determine what to tell (and not to tell) in the final data story.
Visualizing characterizes the process that authors create charts to
visually communicate the complied data facts to readers [37]. Note
that the charts here refer to the graphics readers actually see in the
final data story, not the ones that are used to analyze the raw data.
Scripting indicates the process that authors organize multiple data
facts and their corresponding charts into a certain narrative structure,
including ordering, designing interaction, and messaging [51]. The
goal of this stage is to combine the scattered fragments of facts into
a complete story to convey author-driven narratives [22, 34, 51].
Arranging indicates the process that authors lay out multiple
pieces of texts and/or charts in a scene and build the visual narrative
flow for the readers [8, 36]. Note that Arranging is concerned with
the format of the data story but not the content.
Reading indicates the process that readers decoding information
of the data story including the text and visualizations. The final
message that readers derive is a result of the interplay between the
presented information of the data story and their inherent knowledge,
purpose and beliefs [6, 17].

4

S TUDY D ESIGN

We designed a crowdsourcing user study to explore the possible effects of two widely-used design methods in narrative visualizations,
explanatory annotation (Annotation) and interactive linking (Linking), on readers’ awareness of misinformation in data stories. The
misinformation we tested in the study is the type of author-induced
reader-detectable misinformation. More specifically, two types of
deceptive visualization [45] and one type of text-visualization misalignment [27] were used.

143

