Table 1: Possible causes of misinformation in every step of the production-consumption of narrative visualization. This table is not exhaustive
but shows possible causes of misinformation. The lists in Analyzing and Visualizing steps are simplified from [37].
Step

Causes of Misinformation

Description

Analyzing

Cherry Picking

Filter out data that is not conducive to the author’s intended narrative [10]

The Simpson’s paradox

high-level aggregation of data leads to wrong conclusion [21]

Visualizing

Break Conventions

Create unusual charts that mislead people to analyze them with conventions [13, 31, 45]

Concealing Uncertainty

Conceal the uncertainty in the chart to cover up the low quality of the data [50]

Scripting

Text-visualization misalignment

The message of the text differs from that of the visualization it refers to [26, 27]

Text Wording

The degree of text intensity can bias readers’ memory of graph [43]

Illusions of causality

The text makes incorrect causal inductions on chart information [32, 35, 35]

Obmiting context

Omitting the context needed to understand the story [14]

Manipulating order

Manipulate the reading order through layout, resulting in order bias [16]

Arranging

Obfuscation

Make it difficult for readers to extract visual information through chaotic layout [13]

Reading

Personal bias

Political attitudes, beliefs and other personal factors lead to misperception of facts [19, 38]

Figure 3: The production-consumption process of narrative visualization

4.1 Story Selection
We collected candidate data stories for the study either from wellknown media (e.g., New York Times) or from influential information
publisher (e.g., Our World in Data). In the selection process we took
several factors into careful consideration. Most importantly, we
focused on topics like health and climate changes where misinformation prevail [9, 11, 49]. Then, we chose interesting and relevant
stories to motivate reading. Last but not least, we require that the
text in a given story must reference some part(s) of the visualization
to increase the likelihood that readers would attend to both types
of contents. We also need the original data behind the stories to
ensure the feasibility of embedding misinformation into the selected
narrative visualization.
After several rounds of careful screening and discussions, we
finally selected three short stories from three articles for our study:
• COVID-19 story1 : it presents the changes of infected cases
during the COVID-19 epidemic in Brazil from June 2020 to
January 2021 using a line chart. The text refers to the visualization to explain public policies, like reopening tourist
attractions, adopted by the Brazil government.
• Obesity story2 : it stresses that obesity has become a critical
risk factor for increasing mortality, by comparing the significance of obesity as a cause of death to other risk factors like
smoking in a bar chart.
• Carbon Emission story3 : it argues that developing countries
shouldn’t rely on fossil fuels for development as what the
developed countries have done in the past. A bar chart is used

to compare the per person carbon emissions (metric tons CO2)
of several countries in 2014. China is highlighted to illustrate
the opinion.
We did not use the entire article but extracted sections that related
to the visualizations. We also slightly edited the sections to make the
three stories have similar length (COVID-19 & Obesity: 117 words;
Carbon Emission: 109 words).
4.2 Visualization Design
For each selected story, we obtained its data from the source website. We then reproduced the narrative visualizations. As the three
stories’ original text formats and layouts differ greatly, we unified
their styles in our reproduced version by referencing online article
styles in New York Times. For visualizations, we only included
elements concerned with the text we used in the study to avoid noise.
This process resulted in a line chart for the COVID-19 story, a
horizontal bar chart for the Obesity story, and a vertical bar chart
for the Carbon Emission story as in Fig.4. Then, building on this
basic data visualization, we designed and implemented the three
conditions for our experiment.
1. Static Illustrated Text (Static). Text paragraphs are placed on
the left side of the page, and the visualization is displayed on
the right. Text and the visualization are separated, and for all
stories, they take similar space in the experimental website.
2. Explanatory Annotation (Annotation). Text which has no connection to the visualization is put on the left. Each text relevant
to a particular part of the visualization is formatted as an annotation enclosed in a textbox. Every annotation locates near
the corresponding part in the visualization and has an arrow
pointing to it. The layout of annotations and arrows is crafted
manually to avoid blocking essential contents of visualization.
No hints are implying the reading sequence of annotations.
3. Interactive Linking (Linking). The layout of text and visualizations is identical to that in the illustrated text condition. Sen-

1 https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2020/world/ameri
cas/brazil-coronavirus-cases.html
2 https://ourworldindata.org/obesity
3 https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2017/06/01/clima
te/us-biggest-carbon-polluter-in-history-will-it-walk-aw
ay-from-the-paris-climate-deal.html

144

