A1

B

A2

C

Figure 4: (A1) the Carbon Emission story under the Static condition; (A2) the Carbon Emission story under the Annotation condition; (B) the
COVID-19 story under the Annotation condition; (C) the Obesity story under the Linking condition.

tences that reference the visualization are highlighted. When
users hover over the highlighted text, its corresponding part
of the visualization will be spotlighted by changing to colour
more salient than that of the rest.
4.3

As mentioned above, the text component of each data story contains a single sentence that explicitly states the misinformation. Although the misleading sentence is only part of a complete data story,
it is central to the conveyed message, either to convince readers
that the epidemic is under controlled (COVID-19 story), or to lower
the dangerous of obesity (Obesity story), or to exaggerate China’s
negative impact (Carbon Emission story).
Besides, we assign each misinformation to a specific story to
avoid finding it too easy. For example, suppose we inject Inverted
Axis to the Obesity story and rank the number of death caused by
air pollution higher than that by high blood pressure. In that case,
readers can find the misinformation easily by common knowledge.
We want to observe the impact of the design methods used and lower
the impact of other factors.

Misinformation Injection

We concentrate on AIRDM in the scope of this work. For each story
in our study, we select one type of misinformation to inject into
its production-consumption pipeline as described in the previous
section. In particular, we choose to introduce misinformation caused
by deceptive visualization and text-visualization misalignment as
they have received wide discussions in the research community and
have already demonstrated negative impact on the society [27,31,45].
To be more specific, we instill Contradictory Slant – a form
of text-visualization misalignment – into the COVID-19 story by
adding a sentence stating that the number of infections is declining
attributed to the Brazilian government while the number shown in
the line chart is actually rising. The contradictory slant is an easy-tospot text-visualization misalignment; still, many people fail to find
such misinformation [27].
We apply two forms of deceptive visualization to the Obesity
story and the Carbon Emission story, respectively, namely Truncated Axis and Inverted Axis. Both of them are popular deceptive
techniques for visualization and have been thoroughly discussed in
previous works [45]. In the Obesity story, by truncating the X-axis
of the horizontal bar chart, we make the risk of obesity seem much
smaller (in comparison with the real number) than that of smoking
to go with the claim in the text. In the Carbon Emission story, we
make China’s per capital carbon emissions appear the highest in
the bar chart while its value is actually the smallest by inverted the
Y-axis. We compared China with Japan and Germany in their carbon
emission control performance in the text. Note that in narrative visualization, Truncated Axis and Inverted Axis can be considered as
special forms of Contradictory Slant, as the text in all three types
of misinformation is not aligned with the visualization. However,
the deceptive visual elements in Truncated Axis and Inverted Axis
make it more challenging for readers to find the misinformation.

4.4

Participants

We conducted the between-subjects experiment on Amazon Mechanical Turk (MTurk), a popular crowdsourcing platform [3] with
lay public. We set the following inclusion criteria for selecting participants to ensure the quality of the study: 1) number of Human
Intelligence Tasks (HIT)’ approved greater than 1000; 2) 97% or
above HIT approval rate, and 3) self-reported to be in the United
States. In total we received the responses from 313 unique participants. Based on the filtering criterion stated in Sec. 4.6, we filtered
out 91 responses. The resulting dataset includes 222 responses,
with 98 females and 124 males. Each condition was tested by 74
participants. All participants signed a consent form that present
the procedure of the study and data we would collect prior to the
study. The mean age of participants was 40 years old (20 to 65).
Majority of the participants (72.072%) have a bachelor’s degree or
above. Each HIT took approximately 20 minutes to complete, and
the participants received a compensation of US $2.5.
4.5

Procedure

Participants went through our study following the steps as presented
in Fig. 5. Each of them read the three data stories under one randomassigned condition (i.e., Static, Linking or Annotation). They com-

145

