6.2

Design Implications

society with the ability of online social media to spread information
quickly. Combating misinformation is an essential but also challenging task. In this paper, we choose two commonly used methods in
narrative visualization as candidates of defensive designs. Our study
results show the potential of these two and other similar methods to
be a part of the force to combat misinformation. Also, the number
of people who do not find misinformation in our study again let us
notice the challenge of fighting an infodemic.

In the crowdsourcing study, our qualitative analysis of participants’
feedback provides insights into several design implications to mitigate misinformation in narrative visualization, as presented below.
Visual Design to Guide Attention Most participants in our experiment attribute their failure to find misinformation to their inattention (Table 4). Pennycook et al. [46] postulate that directing
people’s attention to the accuracy of news can be a promising way
to combat misinformation. Consistent with this insights, our results
indicate that a promising design direction is to lead readers to attend
to the part(s) of stories where misinformation is prone to appear.
Such designs could potentially be a cure to “overlooking violation of
visualization conventions” and “misinterpreting the visualization”.
Data-Friendly Text Text is an important component of narrative
visualization, and researchers should rethink how its presentation
can be improved to mitigate misinformation. Our qualitative analysis reveals that text might cause misperception in readers, thereby
leaving problematic messages in the stories unnoticed (e.g., “excessive trust in text” and “misunderstanding the reference relationship”
in Table 4). Empirical evidence implies that whether textual description is closely linked to the data can affect reader understanding of
the data story [39]. A data-oriented narrative style of text, such as
emphasizing the data source, clearly expressing the analysis method
of the data, and more accurately specifying the visual elements of
the discussion, may facilitate readers’ judgment of the facts [41].
Knowledge-Augmented Visualization Some participants believe that the reason why they do not discover misinformation is a
lack of understanding of visualization or the background of the story
(“Lacking Prior Knowledge” in Table 4). A feasible way to address
this problem is to augment the original narrative visualization with
external knowledge. Similar ideas have been applied to improve
awareness of diverse social opinions [18].
6.3

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Yujie Zheng for valuable input. We also thank the anonymous reviewers for their feedback and comments that helped improve this paper.
R EFERENCES
[1] A. Andreou. Comparing the gov’t covid19 maps for end of september
and start of october, it looks as if things are getting better.until you
notice they’ve changed the numbers corresponding to each colour.
had they used the same ones, most of the country would be red or
dark red.#bitsneaky pic.twitter.com/61u1dd4g1u. https://twitte
r.com/sturdyAlex/status/1314563677144657922, Oct 2020.
Accessed: March 31, 2021.
[2] B. Bach, Z. Wang, M. Farinella, D. Murray-Rust, and N. Henry Riche.
Design patterns for data comics. In Proceedings of the ACM Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems, pp. 1–12, 2018.
[3] R. Borgo, L. Micallef, B. Bach, F. McGee, and B. Lee. Information
visualization evaluation using crowdsourcing. In Computer Graphics
Forum, vol. 37, pp. 573–595. Wiley Online Library, 2018.
[4] V. Braun and V. Clarke. Thematic analysis. 2012.
[5] C. Bryan, K.-L. Ma, and J. Woodring. Temporal summary images: An
approach to narrative visualization via interactive annotation generation
and placement. IEEE transactions on visualization and computer
graphics, 23(1):511–520, 2016.
[6] M. Canham and M. Hegarty. Effects of knowledge and display design
on comprehension of complex graphics. Learning and Instruction,
20(2):155–166, 2010.
[7] Q. Chen, F. Sun, X. Xu, Z. Chen, J. Wang, and N. Cao. Vizlinter: A
linter and fixer framework for data visualization. IEEE transactions on
visualization and computer graphics, 2021.
[8] S. Chen, J. Li, G. Andrienko, N. Andrienko, Y. Wang, P. H. Nguyen,
and C. Turkay. Supporting story synthesis: Bridging the gap between
visual analytics and storytelling. IEEE Transactions on Visualization
and Computer Graphics, 26(7):2499–2516, 2018.
[9] W.-Y. S. Chou, A. Oh, and W. M. Klein. Addressing health-related
misinformation on social media. Jama, 320(23):2417–2418, 2018.
[10] A. Cockburn, C. Gutwin, and A. Dix. Hark no more: on the preregistration of chi experiments. In Proceedings of the ACM Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems, pp. 1–12, 2018.
[11] J. Cook, P. Ellerton, and D. Kinkead. Deconstructing climate misinformation to identify reasoning errors. Environmental Research Letters,
13(2):024018, Feb. 2018.
[12] M. Correll and J. Heer. Surprise! bayesian weighting for de-biasing
thematic maps. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer
Graphics, 23(1):651–660, 2016.
[13] M. Correll and J. Heer. Black hat visualization. In Workshop on
Dealing with Cognitive Biases in Visualisations (DECISIVe), IEEE VIS,
2017.
[14] S. Doan. Misrepresenting covid-19: Lying with charts during the
second golden age of data design. Journal of Business and Technical
Communication, 35(1):73–79, 2021.
[15] U. K. Ecker, B. Swire, and S. Lewandowsky. Correcting misinformation—a challenge for education and cognitive science. 2014.
[16] D. Feenberg, I. Ganguli, P. Gaule, and J. Gruber. It’s good to be
first: Order bias in reading and citing nber working papers. Review of
Economics and Statistics, 99(1):32–39, 2017.
[17] S. N. Friel, F. R. Curcio, and G. W. Bright. Making sense of graphs:
Critical factors influencing comprehension and instructional implications. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 32(2):124–158,
2001.

Limitation and Future Work

Our study bears several limitations. First, we conducted experiments
on three types of misinformation covering only two of the many
causes of misinformation we identified in Table 1 (Break Conventions and Text-visualization misalignment). Our study material is
only concerned with two visualization types (i.e., bar chart and line
chart). It is worth conducting experiments to understand what defensive designs can be effective to other causes of misinformation such
as Manipulating order and Obfuscation as well as narrative visualizations with more diverse visualization types in the future. Second,
we did not randomize the type of misinformation for each story in
the experiment to prevent the misinformation from being too obvious to see from the common knowledge. Such design, however, can
affect the effectiveness of our analysis in comparing different kinds
of misinformation but not the conclusion about the two defensive
designs, which is the focus of this paper. Third, our measurements
to participants’ awareness of misinformation can be improved. We
analyzed their awareness based on their reflection after reading stories. More accurate measurements can be derived from other data
collecting methods such as eye-tracking. Last but not least, we found
Annotation and Linking do have effects, but we do not gain insights
into how they work from our data. We hypothesize that they work
by affecting readers’ attention, which requires more investigation.
In the future, we will experiment with adopting instruments such as
implicit measurement methods in psychology [25] to obtain more
accurate assessment of readers’ awareness of misinformation. We
will further test readers’ recall of the story and their potential attitude
shift to discern the extent of impact of awareness.
7

C ONCLUSION

We introduce how misinformation can be injected into narrative visualization and explore possible defensive design methods to combat
misinformation. Misinformation has been ever dangerous to human

149

