2022 IEEE 15th Pacific Visualization Symposium (PacificVis)

News Kaleidoscope: Visual Investigation of Coverage Diversity in News
Event Reporting
Aditi Mishra*

Shashank Ginjpalli†

Chris Bryan‡

Arizona State University

Figure 1: News Kaleidoscope supports visual analysis of discrete news events with a focus on how coverage of an event varies. (a)
After searching for news articles about an event of interest, (b) an overview ordination plot shows the retrieved articles. (c) A site
level view and annotations for rendered clusters is also displayed. (d) Selecting a subset of articles (e) populates subselection views,
enabling further investigation of coverage diversity. (f) Individual articles can also be inspected for detailed review.

A BSTRACT

Index Terms: Human-centered computing—Visualization—Visualization techniques—Treemaps; Human-centered computing—
Visualization—Visualization design and evaluation methods

When a newsworthy event occurs, media articles that report on
the event can vary widely—a concept known as coverage diversity.
To help investigate coverage diversity in event reporting, we develop a visual analytics system called News Kaleidoscope. News
Kaleidoscope combines several backend language processing techniques with a coordinated visualization interface. Notably, News
Kaleidoscope is tailored for visualization non-experts, and adopts
an analytic workflow based around subselection analysis, whereby
second-level features of articles are extracted to provide a more
detailed and nuanced analysis of coverage diversity. To robustly
evaluate News Kaleidoscope, we conduct a trio of user studies. (1)
A study with news experts assesses the insights promoted for our
targeted journalism-savvy users. (2) A follow-up study with news
novices assesses the overall system and the specific insights promoted for journalism-agnostic users. (3) Based on identified system
limitations in these two studies, we refine News Kaleidoscope’s
design and conduct a third study to validate these improvements.
Results indicate that, for both news novice and experts, News Kaleidoscope supports an effective, task-driven workflow for analyzing
the diversity of news coverage about events, though journalism
expertise has a significant influence on the user’s insights and takeaways. Our insights developing and evaluating News Kaleidoscope
can aid future tools that combine visualization with natural language
processing to analyze coverage diversity in news event reporting.

1

In today’s digital society, the ways that people access news is
rapidly changing. Consumption on traditional platforms (print, radio, and television) is falling as consumption via websites and apps
increases [1]. In addition to legacy news organizations adopting
online presences, new digital-native “born on the web” publishers
are utilizing social media platforms such as Facebook, Twitter, and
YouTube for outreach, engagement, and sharing of stories [1].
A corollary to this increasing media pluralism is that, when a
newsworthy event occur, articles reporting on the event will vary
in different ways—a concept we refer to as coverage diversity [25].
While coverage diversity can include structural aspects—e.g. the
language a news article is written in and its length—it also includes
thematic and framing aspects such as media bias. Systematic analyses have identified multiple types of media bias. For example,
AllSides, a media watchdog group, classifies media bias into eleven
categories, including the use of spin words, flawed logic, sensationalism/emotionalism, and ad hominem attacks [4].
Our research aim is, given a news event of interest, to support the
visual analysis the coverage diversity of news articles that report on it.
Specifically, we consider coverage diversity in terms of the keywords
and entities employed in reporting and their potential emotional
biases, which are classified as emotionalism/sensationalism types
of media bias [4]. We employ a design study methodology [43] to
develop and evaluate a novel visual analytics platform, called News
Kaleidoscope, which combines interactive visualizations and natural
language processing (NLP) techniques to analyze coverage diversity.
News Kaleidoscope is designed based on a pre-study with jour-

* e-mail: amishr45@asu.edu
† e-mail:sginjpal@asu.edu
‡ e-mail:cbryan16@asu.edu

2165-8773/22/$31.00 ©2022 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/PacificVis53943.2022.00022

I NTRODUCTION

131

