nalism researchers. These users are interested in analyzing news
reporting (and coverage diversity), but they are not visualization or
NLP experts. To identify “polarities” in coverage diversity, we adopt
a workflow around selecting article subsets (subselections), based on
the premise that while articles about an event of interest will largely
share top-level keywords and factoids, subselections will vary in
second-level keywords, entities, and emotional stylings that enable
a more nuanced understanding of coverage diversity.
To understand how News Kaleidoscope supports the analysis
of coverage diversity, we conduct an extensive set of evaluations.
We first evaluate News Kaleidoscope with the journalism-savvy
target users (Study #1), whom we call news experts, to understand
the specific types of insights promoted by the system. Then, to
understand if and how News Kaleidoscope generalizes to a broader
user audience, we conduct a follow-up study with news novices
(Study #2). The participants in this study have little familiarity with
U.S. news sites and therefore few preconceived assumptions about
how coverage will differ when reporting on news events. Based on
feedback from these studies, we implement a targeted set of design
improvements to News Kaleidoscope and conduct a validation study
(Study #3) to verify their efficacy.
Our results indicate that News Kaleidoscope effectively supports analysis of coverage diversity both for news experts and news
novices, though interestingly it provides different benefits to each
user group (e.g., for news experts, it supports validating hypotheses
and assumptions about news sites). Based on our experiences in
creating and evaluating News Kaleidoscope, we discuss generalizable takeaways for visually analyzing coverage diversity in a news
landscape that is increasingly online and diversified. In summary,
the contributions paper include: (1) we identify requirements for visually analyzing coverage diversity, which constitutes a current and
real-world problem in journalism and media research, (2) we design
and implement a novel visualization system, News Kaleidoscope,
for analyzing news articles about an event of interest in the context
of coverage diversity, (3) based on a series of robust evaluations with
both news experts and novices, we learn about design guidelines and
implications for analyzing coverage diversity using visualization
and NLP.

news visualization tool, its intended goal differs from these systems.
News-focused interfaces build upon the broader community of
visualization of text data. Such visualizations normally leverage
text mining and/or NLP techniques, including keyword extraction,
entity recognition, event and topic modeling, sentiment analysis, and
document similarity/clustering [8, 28, 31], to transform unstructured
text corpora into derived text (meta)data that is suitable for visual
analysis. Several general-purpose visualization systems have been
designed for high-level summarization and browsing of events/topics
via aggregate visualizations [12, 18, 33]. Alternatively, a collection
of documents can be plotted as discrete data points using techniques such as matrices [5], clustering [45], parallel coordinates [17],
force-directed layouts [29], and dimensionality reduction or ordination [9, 26]. Several of these techniques require computing the
pairwise similarities between documents—see Cao and Cui for an
overview [8]. In News Kaleidoscope we employ a multi-weight
aggregate distance metric that can be interactively adjusted.
Contextualizing News Kaleidoscope to Previous Work. In
contrast to prior-mentioned news and text visualization systems,
which support tasks such as the broad summarization of events over
time [33] or support comparing the keywords used by two media
sites [16], News Kaleidoscope’s design is tailored towards a specific demographic and goal: people who are interested in analyzing
the coverage diversity of news reporting, but who are likely not
visualization or NLP experts. In contrast to general-purpose visualization interfaces for text and document corpus analysis, news
articles have special semantics—for example, articles reporting on a
news event likely share similar top-level keywords and emotions, but
it may be necessary to investigate second-level nuances in the data
to understand if and how coverage diversity is occurring. Further,
we carefully design News Kaleidoscope to balance its analytical
capabilities with a user experience and visualization designs that
are accessible to the target user base, by following a rigorous design study methodology [43] that results in generalizable takeways
demonstrating how the visual analysis of coverage diversity differs
from general text visualization, particularly when accounting for the
user expertise.
3

2

R ELATED W ORK

D ESIGN R EQUIREMENTS A NALYSIS

To motivate a visual analytics design for investigating coverage diversity, we interviewed a trio of news experts: journalism professors
who research or teach on news reporting and media (two experts are
currently assistant professors, and the third is a full professor).
A significant problem in the journalism community (stated by
each participant) is that there are a lack of computational tools or
visualization software specifically designed for analyzing of reporting various styles or themes (i.e., coverage diversity) in news-based
reporting. While the participants knew computational processes
existed for analyzing text data (e.g., NLP algorithms), they had little
familiarity with the technical aspects (leading to high uncertainty
and limited trust). Based on these interviews, we derived a set of five
design requirements (DRs) to support visual analysis specifically in
the context of analyzing news reporting for coverage diversity. For
each DR, we provide a brief justification about how it supports the
intended domain (i.e., visualization non-experts who want to analyze
news articles). Section 4 describes the software stack in detail.
DR1: Retrieve articles about an event of interest. The common “first step” for our participants in their analytic workflows was
to search for news articles about a topic of interest via keyword-based
queries in search engines, then skimming or reading through the text
of retrieved articles. This workflow lies in contrast to some previous
systems for document visualization, which begin by showing an
aggregate view of the entire collection (e.g., [18, 33]). Since such
a summarization perspective is extraneous for the current domain
(i.e., the participants already know what topic they want to search
for, and what its high-level keywords are), we omit a summary view

Bias and Framing in News Reporting. Biased reporting can have
substantial societal impacts. For example, a 2007 study by DellaVigna and Kaplan [14] found evidence that media bias had a significant
effect on voting in the 1996 and 2000 presidential elections. More
recently, a 2015 study [22] showed that exposure to biased news can
lead to intolerance of dissent and group polarization.
Today, watchdog organizations such as AllSides [2] and the Center for Media and Public Affairs [3] assess media bias and framing,
primarily via qualitative assessments. In contrast, academic research
has employed data-driven approaches to quantify bias in news reporting. A seminal 2005 paper by Groseclose and Milyo [23] assigned
bias scores to news organizations by counting think-tank citations
in articles, scoring the majority of studied outlets as left-leaning. A
recent survey paper [24] reviews several automated approaches for
identifying media bias in news articles, including ones that blend
NLP with visualization, and recent work has investigated the use
of machine learning for identifying and classifying bias (e.g., by
analyzing the propaganda techniques used by news agencies [13]).
Visualizing News Reporting and Text Data. News visualization tools support the analysis of reporting. For example, LingoScope [16] and Compare Clouds [15] enable the comparative analysis by visualizing keywords distributions between media groups
or news sites. TimeMines [46] generates event timelines based on
semantic features such as keywords and entities present in the text
of articles (similarly, Chieu and Lee [10] support time-based event
extraction via keyword queries). While News Kaleidoscope is a

132

