Site Overview

A

Cluster labeling

b5

Search Panel

b3

c3

C

NER Panel

B Ordination Panel
Adjusting distance
weights

b2

b6
c1

Keywords only

b7

c2

Time only

b8

Entities only

b1

c4

Changing entity type

Location entities

D

b4

Emotions Panel

Organization entities

d2

d5

d1

d4

People entities

d3
Toggling
radial bars

E

Article Panel

Figure 2: The News Kaleidoscope interface consists of five panels to support (A) article search, (B) overview visualizations, (C–D) detailed
analysis, and (E) inspection of individual articles.

investigation and reporting occurs [50]. Given a time range R from
which a set of articles are queried, we compute the temporal distance
date(a1 )−date(a2 )
between articles a1 and a2 as 1 −
. This distance
R
dt (a1 , a2 ) has a range between [0, 1].
Aggregate Pairwise Distance. For a set of retrieved articles, the
pairwise keyword, entity, and temporal distances are independently
computed and combined into a single aggregate distance dist(a1 , a2 )
which represents the overall similarity between two articles:

constraint provides a “balanced” distribution of article sources, but
has the potential to lead to “less relevant” results if a news event was
not extensively covered by a site.
(B) Ordination Panel. The ordination panel provides an
overview of retrieved articles (DR2). (b1) Article are encoded as
circles, and colored by news site, and laid out via dimensionality reduction using aggregate pairwise distances. News Kaleidoscope supports layout via multidimensional scaling (MDS) [27], t-SNE [34],
and UMAP [37]. For the user studies, we employ MDS as it results
in deterministic layouts, thus eliminating a potential confounding
variable. Circles are clustered via k-means clustering, with cluster
hulls rendered using bubble sets [11]. We are motivated to employ
this approach as it provides a scalable view of the retrieved articles,
intuitively using proximity and groupings between data points to
indicate their similarity. (b2) At upper left, an area chart shows the
temporal distribution of retrieved articles.
(b3) At top, several widgets control display settings, including
selecting the distance metric for cluster computation (either aggregate pairwise distance or x/y positioning), and updating the k value
to change the number of clusters. A trio of sliders adjust the scaling
weights for the aggregate pairwise distances (the wk , we , and wt values), which updates the layout in MDS plot (b4). (b5) Hovering on
the k value input shows a tooltip that shows the silhouette score [42]
for each value of k between 2 and 10 (a higher score indicates better
separation between clusters), as a way to explain to non-technical
users what constitutes “good” choices for k.
Two additional overview plots are shown in (b6) and (b7). These
two displays (placed in a tabbed panel) support comparative analysis
at the news site-level and between clusters. (b6) The site overview
tab shows a graph of all news sites with retrieved articles; edges indicate the overall keyword and entity similarity between the content
of their stories. To provide a glimpse of each site’s reporting, the top
four emotions for each site are plotted in a bar chart (labeled by total
stories for each site, with bar colors based on the emotions panel’s
color palette (d2)). This view provides a summary-level comparison
of how news sites differ in their reporting on the current event. The
bottom half of this tab shows the most popular keywords and entities
for each site.
(b7) The cluster labeling contains a heatmap showing (in rows)
the top keywords from each cluster, while (in columns) clusters

dist(a1 , a2 ) = wk × dk (a1 , a2 ) + we × de (a1 , a2 ) + wt × dt (a1 , a2 )
Each distance metric is multiplied by a scaling weight (wk , we ,
and wt ); these are interactively adjustable in News Kaleidoscope’s
frontend interface, enabling a multi-faceted exploration of articles
based on desired user semantics. For example, setting wk = 0 would
mean that the keyword distance would have no effect on the aggregate distance. One advantage of this aggregate multi-weight
heuristic is that new similarity metrics can easily be added as desired. For example, a new metric for “author similarity” could be
computed by analyzing a the historical style or content of a writer.
Clustering Articles by Emotional Style. When article subselections are made (DR3), News Kaleidoscope clusters article these
articles by their emotional styles. To do this, the we calculate the
pairwise similarity in emotional style for articles, and then cluster
the articles using k-means clustering [35]. The similarity is the
Euclidean distance using the precomputed 1 × 8 emotional vector.
4.3 Frontend Interface
Figure 2 shows an overview of News Kaleidoscope’s frontend interface. It consists of five linked panels (A–E), designed to support
the tasks #1–6 described in Section 3. As a note, this image shows
the final design of News Kaleidoscope that includes four additional
features added based on participant feedback from Studies #1 and
#2—(b5), (b6), (b7), and (d5)—which were evaluated in Study #3.
(A) Search Panel. The search panel supports keyword-based
searches for articles about news events (DR1). The user can set
constraints/filters for date ranges, news sites, keywords, and the
number of articles to retrieve. The user also has the option to return
a uniform number of articles for each new sites: e.g., if 140 articles
are retrieved for 14 sites, each site will return 10 articles. Such a

134

