(a) Search for news
articles about the
2016 election.

(c) This event had the most articles
published on November 9, 2016.

(d) Adjust distance metric weights to
update MDS layout to emphasize
article publication times.

(e) Hovering on a Reuters article shows a provocative title.
Clicking the article loads the full text in the Article Panel.

Donald Trump’s presidential victory threatens to intensify
sexism and misogyny in American public life. Polling indicates
that most Americans believed the women who came forward to
accuse Trump of sexual assault. Election exit polls suggest that
allegations over his treatment of women have made a majority
of voters feel uncomfortable. Americans elected him president
anyway. That sends a message that bragging about groping
women—as Trump did in the 2005 Access Hollywood recording

(b) The ordination view
shows retrieved articles
organized by similarity.

Shortly after 3 p.m. on November 8, Donald Trump walked
into the war room on the 14th floor of Trump Tower and
received rousing cheers from his staff. While virtually the
entire media Establishment was predicting Hillary Clinton was
on track to win the election, Trump’s team remained “nervous

(i) Hovering on the article in the
Emotions Panel shows a
breakdown of its emotions.

but optimistic,” in the words of one adviser, that their man

(h) Clicking the cluster creates a
subselection for detailed analysis.

(g) Aggregate emotions by sites

(f) Difference in entities

Joy

Fear

Figure 3: The interactions taken during the Use Case Scenario described in Section 5.

5

are columns ordered by index. Cell color indicates the frequency
that top keywords appear in each cluster, supporting analysis of
high-level coverage trends across the clusters.

U SE C ASE S CENARIO

To illustrate how News Kaleidoscope can be used to analyze coverage diversity, we present a use case scenario with Gary, a journalist
who is reviewing reporting on the 2016 U.S. presidential election.
This event, which took place on November 8, 2016 between Democrat Hillary Clinton and Republican Donald Trump, had reporting
both leading up to the day as well as post hoc analysis and reporting
on the outcome. Figure 3 shows his workflow.
(a) Gary first searches for articles from two media organizations
(Breitbart and The Atlantic) using the keywords trump and hillary
from November 6–13, 2016. (b) The retrieved articles populate in
the ordination panel. (c) By reviewing the temporal distribution of
articles, Gary notices most are published on November 9 (the day
after the election). (d) Gary increases the weight of the temporal
distance metric, which updates the MDS layout to place articles
published on the same day in the same cluster. (e) Using the tooltip
to skim articles in the November 9 cluster, Gary notices that green
circles (Atlantic articles) emphasize the trump keyword, however
they seem to be downplaying his electoral win (example articles
include Trump’s Victory Sends a Disturbing Message About Sexual
Assault and Empathizing with Trump Voters Right Now). In contrast,
Breitbart articles (in purple) focus on Hillary Clinton’s loss (e.g.,
Justice has Prevailed with Hillary loss and Behind-the-Scenes of
Team Trump’s Triumph, Hillary’s Concession). (f) This is further
validated by reviewing the Site Overview Panel; the People entity for
The Atlantic focuses on Trump, while Breitbart focuses on Clinton.
This suggests that the two sites are exhibiting coverage diversity in
how they are covering this event.
Gary now wants to understand how these two sites are differing
in their coverage. (g) He uses the Site Overview Panel to review the
aggregate emotions expressed by these two sites. Three of the top
four emotions (surprise, trust, anticipation) are shared between the
sites, however The Atlantic includes fear and Brietbart includes joy
as an emotion. (h) To analyze the emotions in depth, Gary selects
the November 9 cluster as an article subselection into the Emotions
Panel. He notices an interesting grouping of articles across this panel:
the first and second clusters consist primarily of Atlantic articles,
and one of the dominant emotions in these clusters is fear (this is
supported by the highlighting of keywords in the Article Panel such
as assault, war, military, and revolution). The third cluster, which

(b8) Finally, hovering over an article displays its tooltip. To
select a subset of articles from the overview (DR3), there are two
available interactions. Drawing a lasso makes a freeform selection,
while clicking on a cluster selects all of its articles. When an article
subselection is made, the NER and emotion panels are populated for
detailed analysis.
(C) NER Panel. The NER panel visualizes the article subselection with (c1) an adjacency matrix and (c2) word cloud. The
adjacency matrix shows pairwise article similarities between articles
based on the entity distance metric, allowing for direct comparison
of two articles. (c3) The user can choose which named entity types
are used to compute similarity: persons, locations, organizations,
or all (c4). Entity distance is used for this visualization (instead of
keywords) as it bins extracted article text into explicit categories.
Below, a word cloud shows which entities are most used in the article
subselection. Words are ordered by frequency and colored by entity
type. Hovering on a cell in the adjacency matrix highlights shared
entities in the word cloud.
(D) Emotions Panel. The emotions panel visualizes the emotional styles of the article subselection. Articles are clustered via
k-means clustering using the emotional style vectors. (d1) Articles
within each cluster are temporally ordered according to their publication day. (d2) Using the panel’s control widgets, cluster settings can
be updated and article circles can be toggled to display as radial bar
charts (d3). This view shows each article’s emotional style vector
as a set of eight radial bars around its circle. (d4) Hovering on an
article shows this vector using a (standard) bar chart. (d5) At the
left of each cluster, we show that cluster’s top-4 dominant emotions
(as well as the top contributing words to each emotion) to provide a
glimpse of the cluster’s overall characterization.
(E) Article Panel. The article panel allows inspection of individual articles (DR5) by showing the raw article text and metadata
(author, news site, publication date). Articles are loaded in this panel
by clicking on an article circle (ordination and emotion panels) or
adjacency matrix title (NER panel). To support analysis, the user
can highlight the extracted keywords and entities in the article’s text.

135

