News Kaleidoscope supports scalable analysis of news events.
An immediate recognized benefit, noted by all participants, was that
News Kaleidoscope quickly allows them to see and analyze a large
number of stories about a news event: “The fact that there are so
many articles and site at the same place makes it useful already”
(e1). “The system would be a good place to start for journalists
because we deal with a lot of news articles and it would definitely
be easier if such a system would be used” (e2). “Overall I would
use this system to start with a big dataset analysis because it seems
really good for that” (e5). “This system would definitely be a great
place to start. So many articles and news sites in one place. I find
this system really comprehensive” (e3).
Multiple participants quickly realized that articles could be ingested at by reviewing keywords instead of reading the entire text:
“Visualizing keywords and entities like this is really great. I don’t
have to read the entire article at all” (e4). “The keywords and entities are a good thing in the system, it very nicely shows me which
article is similar and which is it different from” (e1).
Several participants mentioned that News Kaleidoscope showed
coverage diversity through the lens of polarity between news sites
and over time. “Bias isn’t explicitly shown, but as a user walks
through or uses the system more I think it would be easier to see
polarities using the emotion panel . . . the system gives me a very
good idea of coverage” (e1). “This would help me a lot in the kind
of work I am doing. I work on the usage of words in a news article
to then find the underlying polarity . . . this system would be just apt
for it” (e4).
The visual analytics were a novel experience. While one participant (e6) had previous experience using LDA [7], no participants
had used a visual analytics system similar to this as a part of their
own work or research. “I have never used such a system before, I
have done topic modeling, but this is interesting and new” (e6). “I
think just the fact that so many features and site comparison exists
in the system makes it interesting because we generally don’t have
anything like this to use” (e2). “I really like the emotions panel. It’s
a very new take and it shows me a broad spectrum over time, which
is really informative for me and my research” (e5).
An unexpected usage of News Kaleidoscope as a validation
system. While data exploration and discovery are common visualization goals, empirical validation—such as of a hypothesis or
model’s performance—is also a function that visualization can support. Since news experts had existing knowledge and intuitions of
coverage diversity (as well as the potential biases of news sites),
several participants felt the system could be used as a verification
tool. “Since I already know the bias or the kind of articles sites
publish, I might use this system to compare them and validate my
understanding” (e2). Interestingly, e7 mentioned using the system
as a way to review news articles that she helps create: “We can use
it to understand what’s going on: model a [news] outlet. It might be
helpful for comparison. How are we doing in presenting news? Are
we similar to CNN or NPR?”
Targeted suggestions by news experts. While participants
could understand the visualizations and interactions, some took
a bit of time to acclimate to the workflow and the system’s available
functionalities. “Adding a few breadcrumbs might help, because they
are so many things going on here” (e5). Likewise, as non-engineers,
participants were sometimes unsure of the backend algorithms. For
example, clustering was positively reviewed, but several participants (e1, e2, e4, e5) suggested adding some form of explanation as
to how the metrics were computed; e.g., why the specific number
of clusters was chosen: “A little extra support for people with no
CS background would help, because its a very new thing for me”
(e4). “A lot of non-computer scientist people might find it a little
overwhelming” (e3). Another feature that was requested multiple
times was summary and comparative views, to show aggregate event
behavior and site-level comparisons: “‘I preferred more overview

has high Breitbart representation, shows joy as a dominant emotion
(with keywords such as victory, friend, and God). (i) Hovering on
individual articles further demonstrates this: Atlantic articles tend to
have a higher amount of words associated with emotions like anger
and fear.
Gary has now confirmed both that coverage diversity exists in
how The Atlantic and Brietbart have covered this event, and he has
learned how the polarity has manifested in terms of emotional biases
and keywords. The Atlantic has tended towards coverage that evokes
anger and fear in the context of Trump’s win, while Brietbart shows
joy regarding Hillary Clinton’s loss.
6 E VALUATION
To empirically evaluate News Kaleidoscope, we conducted a trio
of user studies. Study #1 consists of pair analytics sessions with
7 news experts (e1–e7), who are the target demographic for the
system. However, to understand if and how News Kaleidoscope
can generalize to a broader population, we subsequently conducted
a follow-up study with 11 news novices (p1–p11). In contrast to
Study #1, we format Study #2 as a controlled usability study to
understand not only the insights supported by News Kaleidoscope,
but also the overall user experience for users with little background
domain knowledge.
These two studies provided robust insights into how News Kaleidoscope supports analysis of news events and coverage diversity,
but they also highlighted several system features that were either
missing or were difficult to understand. After adding a targeted set
of new system features based on this feedback, we conducted a third
study to validate their utility (Study #3).
6.1 Study #1 Design
For Study #1, we conducted pair analytics sessions with 7 news
experts. Specifically, we wanted to understand what specific types
of insights about coverage diversity were supported by News Kaleidoscope. Pair analytics [6,19] is a procedure for capturing reasoning
processes in visual analytics. A visualization expert well-versed
with an interface’s functionality “drives,” while the study participant reasons and makes decisions based on their domain expertise.
Verbal discussion between the driver and participant is the basis for
understanding of the participant’s sensemaking process as well as
what specific insights are uncovered during investigation.
Study Procedure. Study sessions were conducted remotely using
Zoom videoconferencing software. Kaleidoscope’s browser window
was shared via Zoom’s sharing feature from the visualization driver’s
computer to the remote participant. QuickTime Player recorded
audio discussion and screen capture.
For each session, the visualization expert first gave an overview
of the system’s functionality until the participant felt confident to
proceed. After this, the news expert could freely analyze and explore the system using the entirety of the All the News text corpus.
Sessions lasted as long as the news expert desired, though it was
suggested they spend at least 15 minutes in their investigation. At
the end of each session, participants were asked to provide freeform
commentary and feedback on the system, such as what features they
liked, disliked, and found useful.
Participants. The 7 participants in Study #1 were professors
at Arizona State University in the political science and journalism
departments (5 assistant and 2 associate professors). All participants
were highly knowledgeable about American news reporting, including coverage diversity and perceived biases of news sites; a couple of
the faculty specifically researched media bias and coverage diversity
in reporting.
6.2 Study #1 Results
To understand how News Kaleidoscope promotes insights to news
experts, we reviewed the discussions from recorded screencasts.
We report here the usage patterns and the insight themes that were
promoted.

136

