. . . [Start by showing] just showing one cluster first and then the
user digs in deeper” (e5). “I wished it directly showed me the sites’
differences or similarities” (e3).
6.3

Study #2 Design

Study #1 provided understanding into how News Kaleidoscope can
be used by domain experts to analyze coverage diversity. However,
during development we also wondered if such a system can benefit
news novices—users that are largely agnostic about the coverage
diversity of specific news sites. As a motivation for this, a recent
RAND report indicates that people are increasingly searching for “alternative views” about newsworthy events of interest [40]. Therefore,
we conducted a second study targeting these news novice users.
In contrast to Study #1, and to better regulate the user experience
and understand the thought process of news novices, Study #2 was
run as a full qualitative study that included both in-study thinkaloud protocol and a post-study questionnaire and feedback session
about the user experience This allows us to understand both how
the insights of novice users compare and contrast to domain experts,
and also to understand the overall system experience for a set of
domain-agnostic users.
To begin Study #2, participants first completed a survey to collect
demographic information and background knowledge. After this,
the following three stages were run:
Training Stage. Each participant was given a hands-on tutorial
describing all features and interactions in News Kaleidoscope. Participants could then practice with the system for as long as desired,
analyzing news events in the All the News corpus that occurred in
January 2017. A list of four noteworthy events was provided to the
participant as a reference point. The intent was for the participant
to become comfortable using the interface before proceeding to the
main study.
Exploration Stage. Next, each participant was free to explore
the news corpus using News Kaleidoscope for as long as they desired. It was suggested that participants spend at least 15 minutes
using the system, however there was no hard cutoff. To constrain the
study design, we restricted article queries to news events that happened in the latter half of 2016 (approximately 62,700 total articles).
Participants were instructed to start by exploring and analyzing the
coverage of two significant news events from that year: (1) The
2016 presidential election on November 8. (2) The Pulse Nightclub
shooting in Orlando, Florida on June 12. After, participants were
free to explore and analyze any news events they wanted. A list of
noteworthy news events (with associated keywords) was provided
for reference, though participants could query and use the system
however they desired. During this stage, participants used think
aloud protocol to verbalize their thought processes and actions [21].
Review Stage. Finally, participants completed a short survey
questionnaire about system impressions and functionality using a
Likert scale (1 – strongly disagree, 7 – strongly agree). Participants
then had the opportunity to provide freeform comments, suggestions,
and criticisms about the interface and their experience.
Participant Recruitment and Apparatus. We recruited 11 nondomestic engineering students from <Anonymous University>:
age µ = 24.27 years (σ = 1.95), 7 males and 4 females, most of
whom (8/11) had only moved to the United States after 2016. All
participants were proficient in English and had good (corrected if
necessary) eyesight. News Kaleidoscope was displayed in Google
Chrome on a 24-inch monitor (3840 × 2160 resolution) with keyboard and mouse and connected to a MacBook Pro running macOS
Mojave. QuickTime Player recorded session screencasts and audio.
To determine if Study #2 participants could be considered news
novices, we included a pre-screening as a part of the background
knowledge collection. As all participants were non-domenstic students, this included asking several questions about American news
reporting. While many participants reported some familiarity with
American news companies based on a 7-point Likert scale (µ = 4.58,

Figure 4: Before taking Study #2, novice news participants were
asked to rate the perceived political biases of the news sites in the
study’s data corpus. The histograms show the overall ratings for each
site; gray circles indicate the number of participants who simply said
“I don’t know.” This figure illustrates that Study #1 participants were
largely unfamiliar with American news sites, and could therefore be
considered novice news users. As a reference, the rightmost column
shows each site’s media bias rating from AllSides [2].

σ = 1.53) and 8/11 participants agreed that they regularly kept up
with American news stories, when we asked participants questions
about specific news sites they were largely oblivious about how to
rate news sites. Figure 4 shows this explicitly; the high variance in
the historgrams indicate uncertainty, and the gray circles to the right
indicates the number of participants who simply answered “I don’t
know” about a particular site. The labels in the right-most column
indicate the site’s AllSides media watchdog rating, which likely
represents the consensus rating for news experts. While bias is not a
perfect proxy for the coverage diversity analysis that News Kaleidoscope supports, this chart effectively illustrates that the Study #2
participants were largely unfamiliar with the American news sites in
our data corpus, and could therefore be considered news novices for
the purposes of the study.
6.4

Study #2 Results

To analyze Study #2, we first briefly report high-level system ratings
based on post-study questionnaire responses, and then analyze participant comments (collected both from think-aloud comments and
post-study feedback) to qualitatively assess the types of insights and
action patterns that News Kaleidoscope promotes for novice users.
6.4.1

System Ratings via Questionnaire Responses

Figure 5 shows questionnaire responses about News Kaleidoscope
which describe overall system feedback and the perceived usefulness
of its interface features. Overall system ratings (Q1–Q11) were
generally positive, including that it was easy to learn, use, and
comprehend (Q1–Q3), organized data into a high-level overview
(Q5), supported meaningful analysis (Q6–Q9), and encouraged
participants to think about coverage diversity in news reporting
(Q10–Q11).
Responses about specific interfaces features (Q12–Q25) followed
a similar trend in being generally well regarded. However, reviewing
these responses individually indicates at least some features were
not as well received, notably the word cloud in the NER panel
(Q21–Q22) and the action of changing the number of clusters in
the emotions panel (Q24).

137

