were positively appreciated. “I like the site overview part because,
the first time I used the system, it felt like a lot of information was
thrown at me and I didn’t know where to start from” (u1). “The
cluster annotation is really good. Earlier it was a little harder than
the present system” (u3). All three expert users (u1–u3) reiterated
their earlier comments that systems like News Kaleidoscope would
be useful for their work, highlighting the lack of accessible visual
analytics systems for studying news corpuses: “I still continue to
think this will be a useful tool. It’s something I could see myself
using in research.”(u3).
7

this type of analysis, and we intend to extend News Kaleidoscope to
better focus on this type of evolutionary analysis.
Explicitly labeling bias in news stories? Several news novices
requested explicit bias labeling of articles and news sites, however
we are cautious that such an approach is necessary or even appropriate. Ex ante labeling inherently reduces the power of empirical
analysis by anchoring users to the classification outputs of a model.
When considering coverage diversity in the context of specific news
events, explicit bias labeling might poorly account for sites that publish contrasting viewpoints such as editorials and opinion articles.
Interfaces that can provide an initial bias labeling while accounting
for such nuances (perhaps via uncertainty or probabilistic techniques)
are one strategy, but we leave this as future work.
Alternate visual encodings for News Kaleidoscope Though we
found that News Kaleidoscope successfully supports the analysis of
the coverage diversity of news articles, in the future we intend to
look at ways to improve the analytic process via alternative visualization and analytical approaches. As an example, instead of showing
a flat clustering of retrieved articles (in the Ordination Panel), a
hierarchical topics tree could instead be constructed, with individual
nodes representing topics constructed from relevant keywords, entities, and/or biases. Coverage diversity could be demonstrated by
analyzing and interacting with the tree’s structure; for large trees,
aggregation and simplification techniques would likely need to be
employed (e.g., [49]).

D ISCUSSION

While there are many existing text visualization tools in existence,
based on our experience in developing and evaluating News Kaleidoscope, we believe that interfaces tailored specifically for news
reporting analysis can better benefit both for news experts and news
novices. News Kaleidoscope design was intended to elicit nuanced
analysis of coverage diversity via the subselection workflow. To
understand the implications of this design study, we comparing the
insights and workflow themes between the news expert and novice
users, and discuss how they can guide the design of visualization
systems for news reporting analysis.
Novice news users recognize diversity, news experts can see
research possibilities. While both user groups agreed that News
Kaleidoscope supports the analysis of coverage diversity, one main
takeaway from the studies is that insights differ based on the user’s
experience. Novice news users were able to assert that coverage diversity exists in the articles written about news events, but generally
could not make strong conclusions or broad inferences about bias.
News experts, already familiar with coverage diversity and media
bias, were able to use the system to see deeper nuances about coverage diversity. Analysis systems for news novices can be tailored to
accommodate their lack of domain expertise.
Explainability on demand improves sensemaking. No users
in our evaluation were experts in data visualization or NLP. While
both user groups could understand and interact with the interface’s
visualizations, many participants wanted more explainability, particularly when data points or clusterings displayed in unintuitive or
unexpected ways. Such desires echo recent trends in explainable
machine learning and artificial intelligence, where transparent and interpretable models are desired to promote trust in and understanding
of predictions [30]. The explainability features added for Study #3
were non-disruptive to the overall user experience, but they were
positively received in our follow-up sessions with participants.
The need for visualization tools in journalism research.
Study #1 participants were researchers in journalism and political science, but none had previously used visual analytics tools like
this. While systems similar to News Kaleidoscope have previously
been published in the visualization community, the lack of adoption
by our participants indicates that wider dissemination would benefit other communities. Tools like this also motivate an interesting
question for these communities: If coverage diversity is identified,
how can we reduce media bias? This is a non-trivial problem, but
we believe visualization can likely provide an important step in the
process, by helping researchers identify where issues are present.
Visually analyzing the temporal dynamics of news coverage.
Some participants in Study #1 noted temporal analysis as an important facet of coverage diversity: “Development of news stories
over time is interesting . . . I personally for my research loved the
time evolution in both the cases especially the emotions over time,
that is a really informative information in journalism” (e7). While
News Kaleidoscope provides a limited amount of temporal analysis,
systems that focus on the temporal (and unique) dynamics of news
stories are lacking. For example, reporting about events evolves over
time as more facts are learned and media analysis and commentary
is conducted. Future visual analytics systems can be tailored towards

8

C ONCLUSION

We contribute News Kaleidoscope, an interactive visual analytics
system that supports analysis of news events with a focus on the coverage diversity of reporting articles. News Kaleidoscope is designed
based on a formal task abstraction for news experts and combines
several NLP and visualization techniques into an accessible user experience based around keyword subselections in article sets. Based
on a holistic, three-part evaluation, we find that News Kaleidoscope
supports different types of insights based on the journalistic domain
expertise of the user: news novices are able to recognize coverage
diversity at a high-level, but news experts can contextualize it for
deeper insight, such as by characterizing articles according to their
extracted emotional styles. Study results motivate several guidelines
and takeaways for future systems that visualize coverage diversity,
including the importance of explainability for non-technical users
and that the temporal, comparative, and summary dynamics of news
events and coverage can be emphasized.
R EFERENCES
[1] Trends and facts on online news — state of the news media — pew
research center. https://www.journalism.org/fact-sheet/
digital-news/.
[2] Media bias ratings — allsides. https://www.allsides.com/
media-bias/media-bias-ratings, 2020.
[3] The Center for Media and Public Affairs — George Mason University.
https://cmpa.gmu.edu/, 2020.
[4] Types of media bias and how to spot it — allsides.
https://www.allsides.com/media-bias/
how-to-spot-types-of-media-bias, 2020.
[5] E. Alexander, J. Kohlmann, R. Valenza, M. Witmore, and M. Gleicher.
Serendip: Topic model-driven visual exploration of text corpora. In
2014 IEEE Conference on Visual Analytics Science and Technology
(VAST), pp. 173–182. IEEE, 2014.
[6] R. Arias-Hernandez, L. T. Kaastra, T. M. Green, and B. Fisher. Pair analytics: Capturing reasoning processes in collaborative visual analytics.
In 2011 44th Hawaii international conference on system sciences, pp.
1–10. IEEE, 2011.
[7] D. M. Blei, A. Y. Ng, and M. I. Jordan. Latent dirichlet allocation.
Journal of machine Learning research, 3(Jan):993–1022, 2003.
[8] N. Cao and W. Cui. Overview of text visualization techniques. In
Introduction to Text Visualization, pp. 11–40. Springer, 2016.

139

