2022 IEEE 15th Pacific Visualization Symposium (PacificVis)

SET-STAT-MAP: Extending Parallel Sets for Visualizing Mixed Data
Shisong Wang*

Debajyoti Mondal†

Sara Sadri‡
Chanchal K. Roy§
Kevin A. Schneider||

James S. Famiglietti¶

University of Saskatchewan, Canada

Figure 1: A S ET-S TAT-M AP visualization for a meteorological dataset over Canadian Prairies.

A BSTRACT

1

Multi-attribute dataset visualizations are often designed based on
attribute types, i.e., whether the attributes are categorical or numerical. Parallel Sets and Parallel Coordinates are two well-known
techniques to visualize categorical and numerical data, respectively.
A common strategy to visualize mixed data is to use multiple information linked view, e.g., Parallel Coordinates are often augmented
with maps to explore spatial data with numeric attributes. In this paper, we design visualizations for mixed data, where the dataset may
include numerical, categorical, and spatial attributes. The proposed
solution S ET-S TAT-M AP is a harmonious combination of three interactive components: Parallel Sets (visualizes sets determined by
the combination of categories or numeric ranges), statistics columns
(visualizes numerical summaries of the sets), and a geospatial map
view (visualizes the spatial information). We augment these components with colors and textures to enhance users’ capability of
analyzing distributions of pairs of attribute combinations. To improve scalability, we merge the sets to limit the number of possible
combinations to be rendered on the display. We demonstrate the
use of S ET-S TAT-M AP using two different types of datasets: a meteorological dataset and an online vacation rental dataset (Airbnb).
To examine the potential of the system, we collaborated with the
meteorologists, which revealed both challenges and opportunities
for S ET-S TAT-M AP to be used for real-life visual analytics.

Multi-attribute datasets are common in real-life data analytics scenarios and also challenging to analyze. Such data are often explored
visually due to humans’ ability to rapidly comprehend and detect
patterns in visual scenes. The preferred choice of visualization varies
depending on the data attributes and tasks. For example, to visualize
the pairwise relationships among categorical dimensions a simple
way is to use a frequency matrix, where each entry contains a value
representing the number of data records in the row and column category. Here an attribute may only have a few discrete values or
categories. For numerical dimensions, which is either continuous or
have many discrete values over a range, one can use a scatter plot
matrix, where each cell of the matrix contains a scatterplot for corresponding row and column attribute. Some more recent approaches
to examine multi-attribute datasets include Parallel Coordinates [25]
and Parallel Sets [27] visualizations. These visualizations cleverly
utilize the display space to show individual attribute information in
a compact way, as well as provide interactivity to explore attribute
relationship patterns.
1.1

Parallel Coordinate

A Parallel Coordinates visualization represents each attribute using
a vertical axis and each data record as an x-monotone polygonal line
or curve intersecting these axes according to the values present in the
record (Figure 2(a)). For a numeric dataset, a Parallel Coordinates
visualization may provide detailed information about individual attribute as well as their pairwise relationships. For example, one
can examine the value distribution of an attribute by examining
the intersection points along the vertical axis. The axes are usually reorderable and one can examine potential relationship among
two adjacent attributes by examining the visual pattern appearing
between the corresponding vertical axes.
Dataset with categorical attributes poses a problem to Parallel
Coordinates since the lines can overlap each other. For example,
consider a dataset with three attributes (X,Y, Z), each consisting
of two categories. A Parallel Coordinates visualization of such a
dataset will create at most 2 × 2 × 2 = 8 distinct polygonal lines
(Figure 2(b)), even when the dataset contains hundreds of records.

Index Terms: Human-centered computing—Visualization—Visualization techniques; Information Interfaces and Presentation—
Miscellaneous
* e-mail: sean.w@usask.ca
† e-mail: d.mondal@usask.ca
‡ e-mail: sara.sadri@usask.ca
§ e-mail: chanchal.roy@usask.ca
¶ e-mail: jay.famiglietti@usask.ca
|| e-mail: kevin.schneider@usask.ca

2165-8773/22/$31.00 ©2022 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/PacificVis53943.2022.00024

I NTRODUCTION

151

