X

Y

Z

X

Y

Z

X

Y

Z

20

S111
S121
S211
S221

10

S112

40

x1

x2

y1

z1

y2

z2

0

(a)

x1

x2

(b)

y1

z1

y2

z2

S122
S212
S222

(c)

Figure 2: Parallel Coordinates visualizations with (a) numerical attributes and (b) categorical attributes. (c) A Parallel Sets visualization.

1.2 Parallel Sets
The Parallel Sets visualization is especially designed for categorical
data. Instead of showing individual data points, a Parallel Sets visualization reveals data frequencies by drawing parallelograms between
pairs of categories (Figure 2(c)). The width of the parallelogram is
relative to the number of data records that share those categories.
This idea gives rise to the notion of sets. For example, let (x1 , x2 ),
(y1 , y2 ) and (z1 , z2 ) be the categories for the attributes X,Y, Z we
considered earlier. Then for each i, j, k, where 1 ≤ i, j, k ≤ 2, a Parallel Sets visualization forms a set Si jk by collecting the data records
that belong to all three categories xi , y j and zk . Assume that the
axis X,Y, Z are horizontally aligned. Then the set Si jk is represented
using two parallelograms: one corresponding to Si j and the other to
S jk . Here Si j is a predecessor of S jk . We refer to such a sequence
of contiguous parallelograms as a ribbon. Based on the context,
sometimes a pair of ribbons may be interpreted as one ribbon being
partitioned into two ribbons. For example, in Figure 2(c), the two
ribbons corresponding to S221 and S222 may be interpreted as the
ribbon Sx2 y2 being partitioned into ribbons Sy2 z1 and Sy2 z2 .
If the attributes are numeric, then a Parallel Sets visualization can
be designed by transforming each numeric attribute into a categorical
attribute, where the categories are defined as value ranges [27]. For
example, the numeric attribute body weight can be transformed into
categories: Underweight, Healthy weight, Overweight and Obese.
To explore mixed data, which may contain numerical, categorical
and even spatiotemporal attributes, a common approach is to use
information linked multiple views, where different visualizations of
a dataset are visualized across different views simultaneously and
interactions (selection or filtering) in one view is reflected across
multiple views. However, an ill-designed visualization may significantly increase users’ cognitive load, and mislead users showing
ambiguous or unclear information.

In a discussion with the researchers, we realized that for a scientific analysis one often needs to go through various data processing
and visualization steps, e.g., the capability of selecting variables,
dissecting datasets, filtering based on temporal ranges, visualizing statistics such as quantiles or boxplots, and plotting data on a
map, etc. This motivated us to investigate different ways to design
multiple-linked views that would help gain quick insights into such
mixed data.
To explore a meteorological dataset, a widespread approach is
to visualize a topographic map where a selection on the map generates a Parallel Coordinates visualization of the selected data in a
secondary view. While investigating whether such a Parallel Set and
map combination could be adopted to aid in visualizing such mixed
data, we realized that a Parallel Sets visualization are more suitable
in this context as it allows users to select various sets or combinations on the fly, and creates an opportunity to augment statistical
plots on rows when the months are placed as the last vertical axis
(e.g., see Figure 1). Although the discovery of S ET-S TAT-M AP was
inspired by the analytics of meteorological dataset, we soon realized
that similar scenarios may appear in many other real-life context.
For example, consider a scenario where a policymaker is exploring
a vacation rental database to examine the distributions of room price
(numeric) and room type (categorical) across different neighbourhoods (spatial), and understand potential interactions among these
attributes [20].
1.4

Contribution

We propose S ET-S TAT-M AP that extends Parallel Sets to visualize
mixed data, i.e., the data points may contain categorical attributes,
numerical attributes and possibly spatial information.
S ET-S TAT-M AP combines the idea of Parallel Sets, statistical
columns and multiple coordinated view techniques. The Parallel
Sets view displays the data records by grouping them into sets or
ribbons, which provides information about the relationships among
data attributes and the number of data records in each set. We design
the Parallel Sets visualization to link the sets determined by the last
axis with the rows of the statistics columns. Each row of the statistics
columns provide statistical summaries of the numeric attributes for
each category of the last axis of the Parallel Set. By selecting a row
of the statistics columns, one can examine the data records on the
map view. The interactive features (set selection, transformation
of numeric attributes into categorical ranges, axis reordering, color
and texture selection, filtering based on rectangle selection on maps)
allow users to explore the dataset by generating visual configurations
that best suit their needs.
We propose two enhancements for the Parallel Sets view. The
original Parallel Sets visualization only uses colors for ribbons to
help users quickly distinguish categories in the first axis. Our first
enhancement adds textures relating to the second-axis categories
to help users further analyse a pair of attribute combinations. Our
second enhancement to the Parallel Sets view is merging unim-

1.3 Background and Motivation
In an Open Science Meeting of the Global Water Futures, we were
intrigued by observing how scientists analyze various environmental
variables through side-by-side contour-plots of the map to understand their yearly pattern and spatial correlations. The number of
combinations that needs to be analyzed can become very large fairly
easily, e.g., consider analyzing pairwise relations among different
variables in different seasons in different spatial locations. This
restricts the ability of researchers to gain quick insights into the
data. Such a large number of combinations does not readily allow
an efficient way to visualize all the information in multiple linked
views. For a specific example, consider a hydrologist examining
an evapotranspiration process (evaporation from water and soil and
transpiration from plants), which is influenced by a combination
of solar radiation, air temperature, wind speed and humidity. The
hydrologist also needs to examine the annual trends of these weather
parameters across different geographic landscapes: mountainous,
forest, urban, and rural areas.

152

