portant sets into one in order to limit the number of possible set
combinations. We also show how the selection of a category on an
axis can provide users with an interesting spatial distribution of the
corresponding data records on the map.
We demonstrated the usability of S ET-S TAT-M AP with use cases
from two different domains. We show both the strengths and weaknesses of S ET-S TAT-M AP when visualizing mixed data and provide
guidelines to effectively use such a visualization.

bars and sorting the rows by the attribute of interest gives a quick
overview of the value distribution. However, sometimes tabular
visualizations appear to be sparse and therefore, are not scalable
with increasing data size. LineUp [19] takes a step further and allows
users to examine the ranks of data records, where a rank of a record
is determined by a weighted sum of its attribute values. To improve
the scalability of the visualization, LineUp allows users to collapse
columns, shows only the top 100 rows at a time whereas the rest of
the rows are shown in a compressed manner which can be explored
using fish-eye selection [34].
UpSet [28] is a set visualization approach that can be used to
examine complex multi-attribute datasets such as movie datasets.
The user can construct a query using a visual query builder, e.g.,
visualize movies that must include the category adventure, but not
comedy. UpSet first constructs all possible category combinations
(sets) that satisfy the query and then uses those as rows. The statistical summaries (e.g., average rating, release date) of each set is then
visualized using a separate statistics column. UpSet supports multiple views, which are collapsible. For example, the users can choose
to visualize query records in a scatter plot or simply as a data table.
A number of matrix and network based visualizations [11] have been
explored to further improve the scalability of set visualizations.

2 R ELATED W ORK
In this section we discuss the related research under four themes —
axis based, set based, table based, and map based techniques.
2.1 Axis Based Techniques
Coordinate systems have been widely used to visualize two and three
dimensional data for years, which proved their value of visualizing
accuratedetails of such data. In general, for k attributes, one can construct 2k scatterplots to examine pairwise relations. Radar chart [31]
extends the idea of coordinate systems, where each axis of which is
put in a circular manner sharing the same origin point to overcome
the limitation of the standard 2D or 3D Cartesian coordinate systems.
Each data record is represented as a polygon with vertices lying
on various axes depending on the record’s value at that dimension.
Overlaps of the polygons can show the similarities between different
data records. In a Parallel Coordinates visualization [25], axes are
placed parallel to each other, where each data record is presented as
a polygonal line. Compared to radar charts, a Parallel Coordinates
visualization better utilizes the space use, i.e., it provides uniform
space (instead of a cone shaped region) between a pair of adjacent
axes, and the line patterns between adjacent axes are easily comparable since they are parallel to each other (instead of being arbitrarily
rotated). Line overplotting (when the number of data records is
large) and axis ordering (choosing a linear ordering that represents
most interesting pairwise relations) are two common problems in
a Parallel Coordinates visualization. A number of research works
attempted to leverage Parallel Coordinate to effectively visualize
categorical attributes. We refer interested readers to [24] for a survey
on various extensions of Parallel Coordinates visualization.

2.4

Map Based Techniques

Choropleth maps and proportional symbol maps [17] are commonly
used methods to visualize spatial information on a map. Although
they are well-suited for univariate data, color blending and texture
patterns (for choropleth), and glyphs (for symbols) can be leveraged
to extend these techniques for bivariate visualization. Color blending is widely used in spatial analysis to find probable correlations
between two geospatial variables [18] and researchers have examined different ways to construct trivariate choropleth maps [35, 36]
and even 4-variate [39] maps. Overlaying glyphs (icons, pie charts,
and even complex textures) on a map is a popular way to visualize
multi-attribure geospatial information [14]. Typically, glyphs are
designed to encode data into features that can be perceived through
preattentive visual channels [38]. Pexels, introduced by Healey and
Enns [22], encode multi-attribute datasets into perceptual textures
with height, density, and regularity properties. In general, texture of
varied contrast, density, and directionality [29, 37] are often used to
visualize multivariate data. For more details on multivariate spatial
data visualization, we refer the reader to [8, 21, 40].
The use of multiple coordinated views is becoming increasingly
common in heterogeneous data analytics, e.g., environmental data
exploration [7, 13] and multivariate network visualization [30]. One
of the most common examples is a geographic map coordinated with
charts or Parallel Coordinates view, where users can select a region
of a map and examine the updated charts for the selected dataset.
Since multiple coordinated views can visualize different aspects of
the same dataset simultaneously, users can better comprehend the
data. Such visualizations often lack methodological design efforts
and the final visualization becomes a collection of charts, plots,
tables and maps that do not look like an integral part of the overall
visualization and may immensely increase users’ cognitive load. We
refer the readers to [12, 32] for a rich body of research that examines
design principles and usability issues of multiple coordinated views.

2.2 Set Based Techniques
Set based techniques for visualizing multi-attribute data construct
sets based on various-category combinations. Parallel Sets is an interesting example, where it is possible to define a set for any category
combination that contains one category from each attribute. Since
Parallel Sets visualization use parallelograms to connect adjacent
axes, the visualization quickly becomes occluded as the number
of categories grow. Therefore, Parallel Sets are most suited for
categorical attributes with only a few categories.
Spatial data are often visualized on maps. Bubble set [15] is an
example that visualizes contours (implicit surface) for every category
(set) that encloses all its elements and excludes all other elements
if possible. Thus multiple category combinations can be visualized
directly on a map showing how the elements of each category are
spatially distributed. However, such an approach is not as suitable
as Parallel Sets in revealing frequency information and relationships
among two categorical attributes. A region based set visualization
approach [9, 10] may create a cluttered visualization only for a few
categories for irregular and meandering regions. MetroSets [26]
visualizes set systems using the metro map metaphor.

3

D ESIGN OF S ET-S TAT-M AP

The S ET-S TAT-M AP visualization is partitioned into three views:
(left) Parallel Sets, (middle) statistics columns and (right) map view.
We first describe the details of each view and then the coordination
among these views.

2.3 Table Based Techniques
A spreadsheet provides a tabular visualization for multi-attribute
dataset, where the rows correspond to the data records, columns
correspond to the attributes, and each table entry is either a value or
a category of its column attribute. If the precise numerical values are
not important, then replacing the numerical values using horizontal

3.1

Parallel Sets View

The visualization constructs a Parallel Sets view with vertical axes.
The first, second and the last axes (when ordered from left to right)

153

