3.2

Statistics Columns View

A statistics column can be sorted by clicking on the column
header. Sorting a column will reorder both the rows and the intervals
of the last axis of the Parallel Sets view. For example, in Figure 3,
the MaxTemp column is sorted and the months are reordered based
on this sorting (instead of being chronologically ordered from Jan.
to Dec.). The users can filter the data records by drawing rectangles
on the map view. This updates the ribbons in the Parallel Sets view
and the plots on the statistics columns.
A novel interaction that S ET-S TAT-M AP introduces is interval
selection. By selecting a vertical interval of an axis in the Parallel
Sets view, the user can render the information (data records) of
all the ribbons passing through that interval on the map. For the
weather dataset, selecting such an interval (e.g., May) on the last
axis (Month) would render all the tiles corresponding to this month
on the map. We can thus see the spatial distribution of the first and
second axis through color and texture distribution, respectively. This
is illustrated in Figure 7(top), where by selecting the interval May at
the Month axis, we can observe higher MaxTemp and precipitation
at the south-west region and the opposite trend at the north-east
region. In fact, this selection operation generalizes to the intervals of
all the axes of the Parallel Sets, e.g., selection of the second interval
of the Relative Humidity axis (Figure 7(bottom)) blends all the tiles
corresponding to that interval over all months to depict a yearly trend.
The map view of Figure 7(bottom) illustrates the yearly distribution
of the first axis (MaxTemp) through the color distribution on the
map, where we can immediately see a high variation of temperature
within the selected humidity range at the north-east map region.
However, using such an interval selection in the intermediate axis
would require using simple textures such as dots to avoid visual
clutter due to texture overlap.

The statistics column view consists of a set of numerical attributes.
Each attribute is visualized in a column, where the rows are determined by the last axis of the Parallel Sets design (e.g., the months
in Figure 1 create 12 rows in the statistics columns view). The jth
row in a column (i.e., a cell) can be a box plot or a bar representing the summary statistic of the jth category of the last axis of the
Parallel Sets. The box plot gives information about the quartiles
and data range, and the bar plot shows the average value of the set
(determined by the jth category) for the corresponding attribute.
The background of a cell is filled using a linear color gradient using
the colors present in the jth category. Let I j be the vertical interval
corresponding to the jth category. Then the width of a color range
in the jth row is determined by the proportion of interval taken by
the corresponding ribbon at I j . We use the color order as it appears
on I j and set the height of a cell to be equal to the length of I j .
The rationale behind coloring the background of the cells is to
provide users with the composition details for the categories of the
first axis in the Parallel Sets design. Sometimes, the interval I j may
be small and thus the ribbons may be hard to inspect. The gradient
fill leverages the cell space to ease such inspection. The uniform
cell space and linear ordering of the color gradients make it easier to
compare various cell compositions visually with each other.
3.3

Map View

The third component of S ET-S TAT-M AP is a map view. The data is
geolocated (i.e., gridded with latitude and longitude information) at
about 36 km spatial resolution and displayed using color gradient
heat map on a Google map. The heat map relates to a specific
category at the last axis of the Parallel Sets view, equivalently, a row
at the statistics column. Once the user selects a specific row, the
heat map cells containing those data records are displayed. Let D be
the set of data records for a specific cell. If the first axis categories
are numeric ranges, then each heat map cell is colored based on the
average of the attribute values. If the categories are non-numeric,
then the color is chosen based on the most frequent first axis category
in D. Similarly, we determine the textures for the cells by analyzing
the second axis attribute.
While putting density plots or heat maps on map is selfexplanatory for geolocated datasets, however, the encoding used
in our heat map requires further explanation. The heat map provides
users with an idea of where the data points are located. One can
change the heat map resolution to visualize the distribution with
different levels of granularity. The rationale behind using the colors
and textures is to provide a sense of connection with the other components, as well as to provide users with a distribution of the colors
and textures. Such a distribution over a spatial domain allows users
to examine how various pairwise combinations of categories from
the first and second axis relate in spatially.
3.4

Coordination and Interaction Support

Figure 7: Interval selection in Parallel Sets: (top) selection of a temporal range, and (bottom) selection of a variable value range. The
statistics columns are omitted for space constraints.

We coordinate the views by synchronizing the updates on different
views. The standard interactions on the Parallel Sets [27] have also
been implemented in our design. Since the colors and textures on
the ribbons are based on the first and second axis, one can reorder
the axis and choose the first or second axis based on their need. Such
an interaction simultaneously updates the colors of the statistics
columns and heat map. Similarly, changing the last axis of the Parallel Sets view changes the number of rows in the statistics column
based on the categories on the new last axis. For example, changing
the last axis of Figure 1 from monthly to seasonal (spring, summer,
fall and winter) would create 4 rows in the statistics columns view
instead of 12 rows that it currently shows. Removal of the month
axis and using Wind as the last axis would also create 4 rows corresponding to the 4 intervals at the Wind axis. This happens also for
the reordering of axes, e.g., see Figure 10-11.

3.5 Design Rationale
The S ET-S TAT-M AP design follows Baldonado’s [12] guidelines for
designing multiple coordinated views. The three fundamentally different types of information (categorical, numeric, and geolocation)
justifies leveraging the three views (Parallel Sets, statistics columns,
and map). This follows the rules of decomposition, complementarity
and parsimony, which suggests to partition complex data into multiple views to ease user comprehension, to provide complementary
information to best leverage each view, and to use the views minimally (avoiding adding a view unless there is a significant benefit
that justifies the cost).

155

