The S ET-S TAT-M AP design also follows the rule of resource optimization. We organize the views side-by-side in a linear fashion,
which creates a potential to provide (static or user interaction based)
text summary beneath the display. In addition, a user can compare
two S ET-S TAT-M AP visualizations by placing one on top of the other
(Figure 3), which is useful to compare two map selections or two
different datasets. Furthermore, we limit the number of categories
visible simultaneously to maintain the system’s interactivity. The
flow of colour and texture from ribbons to the rows and finally, to
the map make relationships among multiple views apparent to the
user, which is aligned with the rule of self-evidence. The rule of consistency can be observed from the synchronized view updates upon
user interactions (axis reordering, row sorting and map selection).
4

are at 36 km spatial resolution) Most attributes are numeric values for
each date and geolocation, and hence ideal to test the functionality of
S ET-S TAT-M AP on a predominately numeric dataset. We examined
a dataset over the year 2013 and aggregated (by taking average or
summery depending on attribute type) the data records by month,
which transformed the Date attribute into a Month attribute.
Task Demonstration: To examine whether S ET-S TAT-M AP can
reveal any useful information on this dataset, we initiated a collaboration with two environmental scientists: one within the university
and another scientist from the Global Institute for Water Security.
To describe the system to the scientists we planned to demonstrate
the following tasks.
Examining Pairwise Relation: Examine the Parallel Sets view and
examine whether there is a potential relation between the attributes
X and Y.
Comparing Categories: Examine the last axis of the Parallel Sets
view and compare these categories by sorting the statics columns.
Spatial Comparison: Load two S ET-S TAT-M AP view and select
two areas to examine the similarity and differences between them.
Examining Attribute Composition: Consider a category on the
last axis of the Parallel Sets view and examine the composition of
the ribbons by examining colors and textures.
Examining Spatial Distribution: Consider the map view and examine how the categories of the first two axes are distributed over
the map.

DATA P REPROCESSING AND I MPLEMENTATION

We implemented our proposed solution as a JavaScript based web
component, which is cross-platform, easy-to-distribute, and easily
embeddable in any in any modern web application (e.g., in a React
app or even in a pure HTML/CSS/JavaScript project) irrespective of
whether it is using a front-end framework or not. We used D3.js [2]
and Textures.js [4] JavaScript library to build interactive visualizations. We also used a tool chain called Stencil [3] to build framework
independent web components. Our Parallel Sets design is a standalone web component. Parallel Sets and the statistics columns
together form another web component. The map view can pass data
to those views by properties, and obtain data from them by events.
This makes it easy to synchronize the updates to all the views during
an user interaction.
The data is maintained using a single SQLite database file, containing a table with columns for all attributes (including latitude and
longitude). We then use sql.js to query the SQLite file directly on
the browser. We use SQL based queries to filter data based on users’
map selection and compute necessary statistics on the fly. Thus the
rendering time becomes directly proportional to the time to compute
the statistics and the number of elements to be rendered. For large
datasets, one can precompute the summary statistics and heatmap
values into specialized data structures to improve scalability.
5

5.2

U SE C ASES

We demonstrate the S ET-S TAT-M AP technique using two use cases
with datasets from totally different areas.
5.1

Collaborative Development

After we demonstrated the system to the scientists (Figure 8), we observed the need for several meetings so that they become comfortable
in using the systems. We set weekly one-hour meetings over three
months so that they can suggest modifications to S ET-S TAT-M AP.
Some major challenges that we noticed is that the experts took
about three to four meetings before they could comprehend the
system well enough to reason about it spontaneously. Initially, they
had several questions on why the number of crossings increase as
we move from the first to the later axes, and whether these crossings
mean anything, and how they relate to the statistics column, what
the colors in the statistics columns mean and so on. The Parallel Set
design was not something that they were familiar with, and it was
not straightforward for them to understand the connections among
different views. It also took some time for the experts to recall the
system interactions and effectively use S ET-S TAT-M AP.
Based on the experts’ suggestion we refined the system to be used
in a real-life setting (Figure 1). The experts wanted to add numerical
axis at the bottom of the statistics columns, so that they can make
the scientific reasoning and understand whether the data is being
visualized meaningfully. They provided us with commonly used
units for different meteorological variables and also they suggested
color maps they are comfortable using. They preferred quartiles
and simpler textures such as dotted ones over the line based textures
as they felt it easier to understand (due to the smaller number of
ribbons, less clutter and faster interactions).
We modified the legends on the map view to include texture
information based on their suggestions. They also suggested that the
color maps for temperature should be different from precipitation
and follow standard color maps for the system to be used as they
expect. Hence we created a separate control panel along with a split
view so that the comparison between two different spatial regions
becomes easier (Figure 9).

Meteorological Dataset

Figure 8: Illustration for the components of a S ET-S TAT-M AP visualization before the collaborative development.

Dataset description: This use case shows how an environmental
scientist explored climate data using S ET-S TAT-M AP visualization.
We use a Climate Forecast System Reanalysis (CFSR) database
from the National Centers for Environmental Prediction (NCEP).
Each record in the data consists of date, longitude, latitude, max
temperature, min temperature, solar radiation, precipitation, relative
humidity and wind speed. The longitude and latitudes of each data
point is approximately 36 km away from the other data point (data

5.3

Experts’ Analysis

We illustrate the usage of the system by describing a use case that
was run by the experts (Figure 1). The experts used a hydroclimatic
data from 2013 for the Canadian Prarieis Ecozone (CPE). The CPE
is cropped by a polygon covering an area of approx. 700,000 sq km
(270,000 sq miles).

156

