Figure 9: Comparing two different regions in a split view where the month September is selected in both views. The gray attribute in the Max Temp
category at the bottom map denotes that, there exist a high temperature region in the selected area that falls outside of any temperature range
shown on the top view.

Figure 10: Exploration of Airbnb dataset where the city division attribute is chosen as the last axis of the Parallel Sets.

Figure 11: Exploration of Airbnb dataset where the neighborhood
attribute is chosen as the last axis of the Parallel Sets.

The experts selected the min temp, precipitation, and wind. Since
the order of the variables in this study matters, they focused on the
first two variables selected (i.e. min temp and precipitation). They
chose the quartiles view as this is more common in hydrology to
look at the highest and lowest quartiles. Looking at the Parallel Sets,
they could immediately view that the lowest and highest quartiles
of min temp are related to lower and higher amount of precipitation,
respectively. They could also tell that higher min temp that corresponds with warmer months are associated with less wind. While
colder months are expected to be with stronger wind gusts.
The texture showed more precipitation is associated with less
windy scenarios and warmer months. The bar plot showed the
monthly distribution of each selected variable. Precipitation is generally higher in the month of July but its daily values are with the
highest variability. The average monthly wind gust and its daily variability in the months of January and November also are the highest.

The background of the bar plots in each column was identical and
showed the distribution of the first selected variable, in this case, min
temp with blue being the lower quantile or dark blue being the most
dominant color in January and December and dark brown being the
highest minimum temperature in the summer months and September.
Finally, the Google overlay map showed the spatial distribution of
the min temperature in color and precipitation in texture for a given
month. They selected the month January and noticed that for 2013,
Southern Manitoba, east, and north Saskatchewan experienced lower
temperatures than the south Saskatchewan and Alberta.
The experts mentioned that the series of visualization provided
by the system can be valuable for comparing key hydroclimatic variables. The also mentioned that the system, however, has its spatial
and temporal limitations: (a) The data here is only collected for the
year 2013, which makes it difficult to have meaningful comparisons
with other years, comparing trends, and changes, which would be

157

