Figure 12: Performances of S ET-S TAT-M AP as the number of variables increase from 2 to 4. For i variables, where i ∈ {2, 3, 4}, the Parallel Sets
view contains (i + 1) axes (i axes for variables and the last axis for Month).

of great interest for hydrologists and for climate change research.
(b) The spatial resolution of the data is coarse (36 km) which is
a challenge in understanding changes and shifts in variables over
farms or urbanized areas.
We asked the experts about what tools they generally use to visualize geo-analysis results and how S ET-S TAT-M AP would compare
to them. They mentioned that a typical output involves a single
variable color-coded map, generated in Python or R, that can be also
overlaid on a static or dynamic Google Maps. Generally, a couple
of such maps, from different periods of time with the same variable
or different variables from the same period of time, are compared
side by side for decision making. In comparison, S ET-S TAT-M AP is
capable of showing more than one variable in one geographic location at once making the relations among variables more detectable.
The experts were enthusiastic about the prospect of S ET-S TAT-M AP
and using it as a tool to display various standardized hydro-climate
indices at once. These indices are built over long-term hydrological variables and traditionally, they are more indicative of drought
and pluvial conditions [33]. Therefore, for future work, the experts
wanted to extend our focus on using S ET-S TAT-M AP to present and
compare the long-term indices, such as Standardized Precipitation
Index (SPI) and Soil Moisture Deficit Index (SMDI), on one map.
Another opportunity is to integrate S ET-S TAT-M AP with existing
hydrological models so that one can validate the models’ prediction
outputs against observed data.

expected, but the number of bedrooms varies widely for the entire
place option. He then attempted to examine the median price over
various division of the city. Therefore, he reordered the axis to set
the city division to be the last axis (Figure 10), and then sorted the
price column in descending order.
He noticed that the listings in the Calgary center and southern
part had the higher median price, compared to the northern part
of Calgary. He then examined the composition of room types in
the Calgary center. By examining the color and texture, he found
that about two-third of the listings are offering the entire place and
among those listings the 1 and 2 bedroom types are almost equally
frequent. To examine the dataset further the participant added the
neighborhood, and found that a large number of neighborhoods are
merged together. To find most affordable listings he sorted the price
column in ascending order (Figure 11) and found the neighborhoods
(Shawnessy, Crans, Arbour Lake, etc.) with low price listings. By
examining the texture, he noticed that these places are far away from
the Calgary center.
6

S CALABILITY OF S ET-S TAT-M AP

To test the limit of S ET-S TAT-M AP we analyzed its performance
with the meteorological dataset [6] on an Intel i5-1135G7 machine
with 16GB RAM, where the visualization was loaded with MS Edge
97.0.1072.55 on a 4K monitor. Figure 12 illustrates the performances
of S ET-S TAT-M AP as the number of axes increases. The terms
Quartile and Uniform correspond to the cases when the variables
have been categorized based on quartile (e.g., Figure 3(top)) and
equal value ranges (e.g., Figure 3(bottom)), respectively. Figure 12
shows that both the number of polygons rendered in the Parallel
Sets view to draw the ribbons (and hence the rendering time), and
the number of pairwise ribbon crossings increase drastically for five
axes (4 variable axes and the Month axis). The rendering of statistics
column takes negligible time (approx. 3% of total time) compared
to the Parallel Sets rendering. The Parallel Sets view with Uniform
categorization appears to be much more scalable than the Quartile
based categorization.
An increased number of axes increases the pairwise ribbon crossings, and affects the readability of the visualization. Here the interval
selection (Section 3.4) and opacity controls (Figure 9) come into
play. As illustrated in Figure 7, the user can select an interval to
highlight the ribbons passing through that interval to deal with overplotting. However, the overplotting problem remains if one desires
to create a static picture or inforgraphics.

5.4 Online Vacation Rental Dataset (Airbnb)
While S ET-S TAT-M AP was useful to reason about meteorological
datasets, here we show a potential use case to demonstrate its use in
an entirely different setting.
Dataset description: In this use case we examine an Airbnb
dataset, which is an online vacation rental dataset. We use a dataset
for listings over Calgary [1, 5], which contained 2521 listings from
Dec 12, 2019. The final processed data contained many categorical
and numeric attributes, e.g., room type, longitude, latitude, bedrooms, administrative division, neighborhood, overall satisfaction,
price, etc. Since this dataset contains both categorical and numerical
data, it provides a good opportunity to demonstrate the functionality
of S ET-S TAT-M AP in handling mixed data.
Workflow: In this case the dataset was explored by a PhD student,
who was familiar with both Parallel Coordinate and Parallel Sets
visualization. He was interested in examining the Airbnb listings to
better understand how the rental listing types and price vary across
various divisions of the city.
He selected the attributes room type (shared, private room, or
entire place), city division (borough), and bedrooms (number of
rooms) to be visualized in the Parallel Sets view. Then he selected
ratings and price attributes to be visualized in the statistics column.
He first observed that there are only a few shared accommodation
options compared to the private room or entire place option. He also
noticed that private room always comes with a single bedroom as

7

D ISCUSSION AND F UTURE W ORK

From our experience, we have seen S ET-S TAT-M AP to perform very
well if both the number of axes (variables) and the number of intervals (categories) per variable are bounded by 5. For an axis to
be useful, it needs to have at least two intervals, each corresponding to a reasonable number of data records. Since the ribbons are

158

