Figure 13: (left) Texture cut-off issues. (right) noisy pattern created by
a combination of overlapping textures.

Figure 14: (left) Label overlapping. (middle) Adaptive labelling. (right)
Mouseover interaction.

likely to get split in every subsequent axes, bringing the axes with
few categories earlier in the axes sequence may reduce the overplotting problem. It would be interesting to further investigate such
conditions for a dataset to be effectively visualized using S ET-S TATM AP. In addition, we have identified a number of key factors that
needs to be carefully considered when designing a S ET-S TAT-M AP
visualization.
Choice of axis: To effectively use S ET-S TAT-M AP, users need
to understand the concept that the color and texture comes from the
first and second axis, respectively, and the categories to be compared
should be chosen as the last axis of the Parallel Sets. One option to
ease the learning process, especially for non-scientific users, is to ask
to identify important categories. For example, after loading the data,
the system can ask to choose a categorical attribute (independent
variable) over which the users would like to see the data pattern.
This will be the last axis of the Parallel Sets view. After the user
chooses the attribute, the system can ask to select the categorical
and numerical attributes (dependent variables) of interest to populate
the Parallel Sets and statistics column views. There can still be a
steep learning curve to effectively use the numerical attribute as a
categorical one. In the future, it would be interesting to investigate
how the user’s learning rate affects knowledge discovery.
Colors and opacity: One must add some transparency to the
ribbons to provide users with a sense of connectedness. This also
allows users to better perceive the line patterns that appears between
adjacent axes. In a poorly designed color map some ribbon colors
may interfere with its texture. A systematic way to choose colors
would be to choose a dark color for texture and light colors for the
ribbon color map, or vice versa. In our work we color the texture in
gray and choose at most 8 other light colors from a perceptual color
map. Ordering of the colors is also important as it helps users better
understand the distribution of numeric ranges.
Choice of texture: Ribbon texture is an important aspect of S ETS TAT-M AP design. While examining the ribbons intersecting a line
interval, the textures of the ribbons can reveal the composition of
the second axis categories. In a poorly designed texture map, thin
ribbons may entirely miss the pattern or provide a partial pattern
creating ambiguity. The problem of cut-off is illustrated in Figure 13(left), where the top ribbon can be interpreted as a cut-off
cross or wave pattern. Similarly, The fourth ribbon from the top
can be seen as a cut-off circle or wave pattern. Another problem
of choosing complex patterns is that they are difficult to relate with
numeric ranges, and overlapping ribbons makes the visualization
cluttered by creating noisy patterns, as illustrated in Figure 13(right),
which increase users’ cognitive load.
Adaptive label size and mouse over: A S ET-S TAT-M AP design
creates intervals of widely varied lengths. Therefore, some interval
may be very thin, creating a problem for label placement, e.g.,
see Figure 14(left). To best leverage the vertical space, a careful
design must attempt to limit the number of category per axis that
are visible simultaneously, and provide functionality such that the
users can sort and scroll the category list. Furthermore, the label size
should be adaptive to the length of the line to avoid visual occlusion
(Figure 14(middle)), and allow users to inspect detailed information
on mouse over (Figure 14(right)).
Linear gradient color: The background of each cell in the statistics columns view is colored with a linear gradient. Such a linear

gradient may not create a color range with a proper perceptual balance, i.e., people may perceive the width or strength of the colors
differently than the underlying numeric values. One problem with
multiple colors appears to be with numeric ranges, where the preferred color map is sequential or diverging. Since the adjacent colors
in such a color map is perceptually close to each other, the linear
gradient may make it harder to distinguish the color boundaries (Figure 15). For categorical color maps, one may obtain a background
with multiple vertical stripes. We suggest minimal use of the number
of colors since multiple stripes may produce unwanted visual effects
(e.g., McCollough effect [16] or optical illusion) over prolonged use.
Further investigation on how human perceive such linear gradient in
a visual analytics context, or whether the benefit of gradient exceeds
the potential risk can be an exciting avenue of research.

Figure 15: Linear gradient makes the boundaries harder to distinguish.

Adaptive heatmap: The S ET-S TAT-M AP visualization uses a
heatmap view on the map, where the cells are colored and textured
based on the first and second axis. If both these axes are numerical,
then for each cell one can choose the color and text based on the
average value. However, for categorical attributes, it needs to be
based on a summary statstic. In our design, we pick the color
and texture based on the high frequent categories. However, based
on the data (e.g., when all categories are equally frequent) this
may create misleading representation. One may partially improve
the problem by using an adaptive quadtree-based heatmap or by
providing complex glyphs (e.g., pie charts). However, a conscious
investigation is required to shed more light into this situation.
Perceptually-motivated Parallel Sets: Although we currently used
the first two axes for color and texture augmentation, it would be
interesting to investigate ways to extend this to more axes. We believe that our effort for stylizing ribbons to analyze the distribution
of a combination of attributes may potentially be extended further
by leveraging the idea of perceptually-motivated visualization [23]
by mapping the categories of different axes with different perceptual properties. An effective perceptually-motivated visualization is
harder to design and also to interpret. However, such a visualization
can still be valuable in an infographic setting, as well as to examine
or extend the boundary of human perception.
8 C ONCLUSION
Although Parallel Coordinates and Parallel Sets visualizations are
widely used to interactively explore numerical and categorical
datasets, respectively, there still exist opportunities to explore new
methods to visualize spatial data with mixed numeric and categorical
attributes. In this paper we propose S ET-S TAT-M AP that leverages
the idea of multiple coordinated views. The design harmoniously
blend a Parallel Sets view, a statistics columns view and a map view
to visualize mixed data in a linear fashion. Our design allows users to
explore the pairwise attribute relationships, statistical summaries and

159

