2022 IEEE 15th Pacific Visualization Symposium (PacificVis)

VANT : A Visual Analytics System for Refining Parallel Corpora
in Neural Machine Translation
Sebeom Park1 2 * Soohyun Lee1 † Youngtaek Kim2 ‡ Hyeon Jeon1 §
Seokweon Jung1 ¶ Jinwook Bok1 || Jinwook Seo1 **
1 Seoul National University, Seoul, Republic of Korea
2 Samsung Electronics, Seoul, Republic of Korea

Figure 1: Overview of VANT. (A) Distribution View shows the distribution of different metrics related to the quality of parallel corpora
for training a Neural Machine Translation (NMT) model. Users can identify low-quality candidate pairs (i.e., sentence pairs having
low metric scores) as noise candidates, which negatively affect the model performance. (B) Ranking View depicts the ranking of
noise candidates determined by a user-steerable weighted sum of metrics. Users can select and save a subset of candidates as a
ruleset for refinement. (C) Text Compare View allows users to visually inspect noisy parallel corpora in their natural language form.
(D) Ruleset View depicts detailed information of the selected rulesets (e.g., average metric scores, the number of common items
between rulesets), so that users can analyze the status and pattern of rulesets.

A BSTRACT

by providing diverse quality metrics (e.g., cosine similarity, BLEU,
length ratio) and (2) allowing users to visually examine and manage
the corpora based on the pre-computed metrics scores. Our system’s
effectiveness and usefulness are demonstrated through a qualitative
user study with eight participants, including four domain experts
with real-world datasets.

The quality of parallel corpora used to train a Neural Machine Translation (NMT) model can critically influence the model’s performance. Various approaches for refining parallel corpora have been
introduced, but there is still much room for improvements, such as
enhancing the efficiency and the quality of refinement. We introduce VANT, a novel visual analytics system for refining parallel
corpora used in training an NMT model. Our system helps users
to readily detect and filter noisy parallel corpora by (1) aiding the
quality estimation of individual sentence pairs within the corpora

Index Terms: Human-centered computing—Visualization—
Visualization system and tools—Visualization toolkits; Computing methodologies—Artificial intelligence—Natural language
processing—Machine translation

* e-mail: spark@hcil.snu.ac.kr, sebeom.park@samsung.com
† e-mail: shlee@hcil.snu.ac.kr

1

‡ e-mail: ytaek.kim@samsung.com

Training Neural Machine Translation (NMT) models requires parallel corpora, a set of sentence pairs translated into different languages.
In general, parallel corpora are crawled from the web and digitized
books, which often ends up with noisy parallel corpora. Such noisy
corpora could lead to mistranslation [9]. Since the quality of the

§ e-mail: hj@hcil.snu.ac.kr
¶ e-mail: swjung@hcil.snu.ac.kr
|| e-mail: bok@hcil.snu.ac.kr
** e-mail: jseo@snu.ac.kr

2165-8773/22/$31.00 ©2022 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/PacificVis53943.2022.00029

I NTRODUCTION

181

