(A) Natural Language Form

corpora influences the performance of the NMT model, refining
poor-quality(noisy) parallel corpora plays a critical role in improving the model quality itself. Therefore, improving the quality of the
NMT model by detecting and removing noisy pairs in the parallel
corpora has recently been an important ongoing research topic [12].
Various methods have been utilized to improve the quality of
corpora. Users can manually investigate and detect noisy parallel
corpora by inspecting each sentence pair within the corpora one-byone. However, manual inspection is time-consuming, laborious, and
also becomes more challenging without the linguistic background
of the data. Rule-based automatic filtering techniques were also
proposed, which utilized general properties of sentences such as
length and word counts difference [11]. There are also model-based
automatic filtering tools that exploit the semantic information (e.g.,
cosine similarity) of corpora [21]. However, these automatic approaches suffer from misclassification (e.g., a high quality sentence
pair can be incorrectly classified as noise) [1]; Moreover, as there
are diverse types of noisy parallel corpora [9], fully automated approaches may not be robust enough to deal with all types of noisy
parallel corpora.
To alleviate this limitation, we present VANT, a visual analytics
system for interactively refining parallel corpora in Neural Machine
Translation. Our system enables users to readily understand the
overall status of large parallel corpora. Users can efficiently identify
noise candidates based on derived metrics to evaluate the quality
of parallel corpora. By first focusing on the candidates, users can
more effectively examine actual noisy parallel corpora and analyze
the noise patterns with our visual encoding. We have demonstrated
the usefulness and the effectiveness of our system by conducting a
qualitative user study with eight participants including four domain
experts who work at a major IT company.
2

Length Ratio, Token Length Ratio

Source corpus

Target corpus
Translation

Back-translated
target corpus

(B) Vector Form

Back-translated
source corpus
Universal Sentence Encoder
Cosine Sim.

Source corpus
Cosine Sim., BLUE, METEOR

Back-translated
target corpus

Target corpus
Cosine Sim., BLUE, METEOR

Back-translated
source corpus

Figure 2: Illustration of the data preprocessing for VANT (Section 4).
We used both the natural language form and the vector form of each
corpus to widen the range of applied metrics.

3

D ESIGN R EQUIREMENTS

We conducted a preliminary interview with two engineers who have
more than eight years of career in NMT. During the interview, we
mainly discussed about (1) the necessity of detecting noisy sentence
pairs and refining parallel corpora, and (2) difficulties in data filtering
process. In the interview with the experts, we were able to learn current practices and difficulties in the corpora refinement task. Based
on the interview results, we established four design requirements.
• DR1: Provide a scalable overview of the quality of NMT data.
It requires too much effort for users to identify low quality sentence pairs from large parallel corpora for training NMT model.
Thus, the system should show the distribution of metrics scores so
that users can readily understand the overall quality of parallel corpora and find noise candidates, a subset of the corpora consisting
of sentence pairs that can potentially become real noise.

R ELATED W ORKS

Automatic Refinement of Parallel Corpora Early works for automatic refinement of parallel corpora were based on the general
properties of a sentence.
For example, Moses [11] filter sentence pairs based on the length
differences between source and target sentences. Since semantic
information is not utilized in these conventional approaches, several
model-based filtering methods have been further presented. For instance, Xu et al. [20] and Zhang et al. [21] first convert target and
source sentences into embedding vectors using a pretrained model,
and filters corpora based on a similarity metrics such as cosine similarity between the vectors. However, automatic approaches can still
suffer from misclassification issues [1]. VANT migrates such issues
by providing an interactive visual analytics system to examine and
refine parallel corpora; our system overcomes automatic approaches
by combining it with a manual process, thus enables more accurate
refinement.

• DR2: Recommend noise candidates using multi-metric rankings with user-adjustable weights. Each metric represents the
quality of the parallel corpora from only a single perspective. For
more comprehensive refinements, users need to consider several
different metrics to find noise candidates from more diverse perspectives. Therefore, the system should provide several metrics
and allow users to interactively adjust the weight of each metric to
compute combined metric scores for sorting the noise candidates
so that users can further examine the noise candidates from more
diverse perspectives of their interest.
• DR3: Enable users with low literacy to inspect the noisy corpora. It is challenging to evaluate the correctness of the translation through the natural language form of source and target
sentences if users are not fluent in both languages. The system
should allow users to inspect parallel corpora in the natural language form so that they can determine noise without linguistic
background.

Visual analytics for NMT Most visual analytics systems for NMT
are developed for model explanation. For example, Data2Vis [6] provided interactive visualizations to understand Sequence-to-Sequence
languages models. Some researches focused on visualizing attention scores [18] for detailed explanation of the translation process.
Munz et al. [13] proposed a visual analytics system to help users
correct erroneous translations by examining the translation result of
monolingual data provided by NMT model.
However, while such visual analytics systems for a NMT model
have been proposed, a system for parallel corpora is not yet introduced. Although interactive data wrangling tools with mixedinitiative interfaces can be used to clean up noisy raw data in general [8], they are not suitable for dealing with parallel corpora. Our
work aims to fill such gaps by introducing an interactive visual analytics system specialized in examining and refining parallel corpora.

• DR4: Support pattern analysis of noisy parallel corpora. Since
noisy parallel corpora can exist in various forms, it is important
for users to analyze the information of items which are previously
identified for finding more noisy candidates. Therefore, the system should provide statistical information of actual noise such as
metric scores and steerable weights, so that users can not only
track the previous selection history but also analyze the characteristics of identified noise to discover patterns. Users can utilize the
pattern of existing noisy parallel corpora for the next tasks.

182

